Chapter 10


THE VOICE OF SARUMAN 


They passed through the ruined tunnel and stood upon a 
heap of stones, gazing at the dark rock of Orthanc, and its 
many windows, a menace still in the desolation that lay all 
about it. The waters had now nearly all subsided. Here and 
there gloomy pools remained, covered with scum and wreck- 
age; but most of the wide circle was bare again, a wilderness 
of slime and tumbled rock, pitted with blackened holes, and 
dotted with posts and pillars leaning drunkenly this way and 
that. At the rim of the shattered bowl there lay vast mounds 
and slopes, like the shingles cast up by a great storm; and 
beyond them the green and tangled valley ran up into the 
long ravine between the dark arms of the mountains. Across 
the waste they saw riders picking their way; they were coming 
from the north side, and already they were drawing near to 
Orthanc. 

‘There is Gandalf, and Theoden and his men!’ said Leg- 
olas. ‘Let us go and meet them!’ 

‘Walk warily!’ said Merry. ‘There are loose slabs that may 
tilt up and throw you down into a pit, if you don’t take care.’ 

They followed what was left of the road from the gates to 
Orthanc, going slowly, for the flag-stones were cracked and 
slimed. The riders, seeing them approach, halted under the 
shadow of the rock and waited for them. Gandalf rode for- 
ward to meet them. 

‘Well, Treebeard and I have had some interesting dis- 
cussions, and made a few plans,’ he said; ‘and we have all 
had some much-needed rest. Now we must be going on 
again. I hope you companions have all rested, too, and 
refreshed yourselves?’ 


752 


THE TWO TOWERS 


‘We have,’ said Merry. ‘But our discussions began and 
ended in smoke. Still we feel less ill-disposed towards 
Saruman than we did.’ 

‘Do you indeed?’ said Gandalf. ‘Well, I do not. I have now 
a last task to do before I go: I must pay Saruman a farewell 
visit. Dangerous, and probably useless; but it must be done. 
Those of you who wish may come with me - but beware! 
And do not jest! This is not the time for it.’ 

‘I will come,’ said Gimli. ‘I wish to see him and learn if he 
really looks like you.’ 

‘And how will you learn that, Master Dwarf?’ said Gandalf. 
‘Saruman could look like me in your eyes, if it suited his 
purpose with you. And are you yet wise enough to detect all 
his counterfeits? Well, we shall see, perhaps. He may be shy 
of showing himself before many different eyes together. But 
I have ordered all the Ents to remove themselves from sight, 
so perhaps we shall persuade him to come out.’ 

‘What’s the danger?’ asked Pippin. Will he shoot at us, 
and pour fire out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us 
from a distance?’ 

‘The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light 
heart,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no knowing what he can 
do, or may choose to try. A wild beast cornered is not safe 
to approach. And Saruman has powers you do not guess. 
Beware of his voice!’ 

They came now to the foot of Orthanc. It was black, and 
the rock gleamed as if it were wet. The many faces of the 
stone had sharp edges as though they had been newly chis- 
elled. A few scorings, and small flake-like splinters near the 
base, were all the marks that it bore of the fury of the Ents. 

On the eastern side, in the angle of two piers, there was a 
great door, high above the ground; and over it was a shuttered 
window, opening upon a balcony hedged with iron bars. 
Up to the threshold of the door there mounted a flight of 
twenty-seven broad stairs, hewn by some unknown art of the 
same black stone. This was the only entrance to the tower; 



THE VOICE OF SARUMAN 


753 


but many tall windows were cut with deep embrasures in the 
climbing walls: far up they peered like little eyes in the sheer 
faces of the horns. 

At the foot of the stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted. 
‘I will go up,’ said Gandalf. ‘I have been in Orthanc and I 
know my peril.’ 

‘And I too will go up,’ said the king. ‘I am old, and fear no 
peril any more. I wish to speak with the enemy who has done 
me so much wrong. Eomer shall come with me, and see that 
my aged feet do not falter.’ 

‘As you will,’ said Gandalf. ‘Aragorn shall come with me. 
Let the others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear 
and see enough, if there is anything to hear or see.’ 

‘Nay!’ said Gimli. ‘Legolas and I wish for a closer view. 
We alone here represent our kindreds. We also will come 
behind.’ 

‘Come then!’ said Gandalf, and with that he climbed the 
steps, and Theoden went beside him. 

The Riders of Rohan sat uneasily upon their horses, 
on either side of the stair, and looked up darkly at the 
great tower, fearing what might befall their lord. Merry and 
Pippin sat on the bottom step, feeling both unimportant and 
unsafe. 

‘Half a sticky mile from here to the gate!’ muttered Pippin. 
‘I wish I could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! 
What did we come for? We are not wanted.’ 

Gandalf stood before the door of Orthanc and beat on 
it with his staff. It rang with a hollow sound. ‘Saruman, 
Saruman!’ he cried in a loud commanding voice. ‘Saruman 
come forth!’ 

For some time there was no answer. At last the window 
above the door was unbarred, but no figure could be seen at 
its dark opening. 

Who is it?’ said a voice. What do you wish?’ 

Theoden started. ‘I know that voice,’ he said, ‘and I curse 
the day when I first listened to it.’ 

‘Go and fetch Saruman, since you have become his 



754 


THE TWO TOWERS 


footman, Grima Wormtongue!’ said Gandalf. ‘And do not 
waste our time!’ 

The window closed. They waited. Suddenly another voice 
spoke, low and melodious, its very sound an enchantment. 
Those who listened unwarily to that voice could seldom 
report the words that they heard; and if they did, they won- 
dered, for little power remained in them. Mostly they remem- 
bered only that it was a delight to hear the voice speaking, all 
that it said seemed wise and reasonable, and desire awoke in 
them by swift agreement to seem wise themselves. When 
others spoke they seemed harsh and uncouth by contrast; 
and if they gainsaid the voice, anger was kindled in the hearts 
of those under the spell. For some the spell lasted only while 
the voice spoke to them, and when it spoke to another they 
smiled, as men do who see through a juggler’s trick while 
others gape at it. For many the sound of the voice alone 
was enough to hold them enthralled; but for those whom it 
conquered the spell endured when they were far away, and 
ever they heard that soft voice whispering and urging them. 
But none were unmoved; none rejected its pleas and its com- 
mands without an effort of mind and will, so long as its 
master had control of it. 

‘Well?’ it said now with gentle question. ‘Why must you 
disturb my rest? Will you give me no peace at all by night or 
day?’ Its tone was that of a kindly heart aggrieved by injuries 
undeserved. 

They looked up, astonished, for they had heard no sound 
of his coming; and they saw a figure standing at the rail, 
looking down upon them: an old man, swathed in a great 
cloak, the colour of which was not easy to tell, for it changed 
if they moved their eyes or if he stirred. His face was long, 
with a high forehead, he had deep darkling eyes, hard to 
fathom, though the look that they now bore was grave and 
benevolent, and a little weary. His hair and beard were white, 
but strands of black still showed about his lips and ears. 

‘Like, and yet unlike,’ muttered Gimli. 

‘But come now,’ said the soft voice. ‘Two at least of you 



THE VOICE OF SARUMAN 


755 


I know by name. Gandalf I know too well to have much 
hope that he seeks help or counsel here. But you, Theoden 
Lord of the Mark of Rohan, are declared by your noble 
devices, and still more by the fair countenance of the House 
of Eorl. O worthy son of Thengel the Thrice-renowned! Why 
have you not come before, and as a friend? Much have I 
desired to see you, mightiest king of western lands, and 
especially in these latter years, to save you from the unwise 
and evil counsels that beset you! Is it yet too late? Despite 
the injuries that have been done to me, in which the men of 
Rohan, alas! have had some part, still I would save you, and 
deliver you from the ruin that draws nigh inevitably, if you 
ride upon this road which you have taken. Indeed I alone can 
aid you now.’ 

Theoden opened his mouth as if to speak, but he said 
nothing. He looked up at the face of Saruman with its dark 
solemn eyes bent down upon him, and then to Gandalf at his 
side; and he seemed to hesitate. Gandalf made no sign; but 
stood silent as stone, as one waiting patiently for some call 
that has not yet come. The Riders stirred at first, murmur- 
ing with approval of the words of Saruman; and then they 
too were silent, as men spell-bound. It seemed to them that 
Gandalf had never spoken so fair and fittingly to their lord. 
Rough and proud now seemed all his dealings with Theoden. 
And over their hearts crept a shadow, the fear of a great 
danger: the end of the Mark in a darkness to which Gandalf 
was driving them, while Saruman stood beside a door of 
escape, holding it half open so that a ray of light came 
through. There was a heavy silence. 

It was Gimli the dwarf who broke in suddenly. ‘The words 
of this wizard stand on their heads,’ he growled, gripping the 
handle of his axe. ‘In the language of Orthanc help means 
ruin, and saving means slaying, that is plain. But we do not 
come here to beg.’ 

‘Peace!’ said Saruman, and for a fleeting moment his voice 
was less suave, and a light flickered in his eyes and was gone. 
‘I do not speak to you yet, Gimli Gloin’s son,’ he said. ‘Far 



756 


THE TWO TOWERS 


away is your home and small concern of yours are the 
troubles of this land. But it was not by design of your own 
that you became embroiled in them, and so I will not blame 
such part as you have played - a valiant one, I doubt not. 
But I pray you, allow me first to speak with the King of 
Rohan, my neighbour, and once my friend. 

‘What have you to say, Theoden King? Will you have 
peace with me, and all the aid that my knowledge, founded 
in long years, can bring? Shall we make our counsels together 
against evil days, and repair our injuries with such good will 
that our estates shall both come to fairer flower than ever 
before?’ 

Still Theoden did not answer. Whether he strove with 
anger or doubt none could say. Eomer spoke. 

‘Lord, hear me!’ he said. ‘Now we feel the peril that we 
were warned of. Have we ridden forth to victory, only to 
stand at last amazed by an old liar with honey on his forked 
tongue? So would the trapped wolf speak to the hounds, if 
he could. What aid can he give to you, forsooth? All he desires 
is to escape from his plight. But will you parley with this 
dealer in treachery and murder? Remember Theodred at the 
Fords, and the grave of Hama in Helm’s Deep!’ 

‘If we speak of poisoned tongues what shall we say of 
yours, young serpent?’ said Saruman, and the flash of his 
anger was now plain to see. ‘But come, Eomer, Eomund’s 
son!’ he went on in his soft voice again. ‘To every man his 
part. Valour in arms is yours, and you win high honour 
thereby. Slay whom your lord names as enemies, and be 
content. Meddle not in policies which you do not understand. 
But maybe, if you become a king, you will find that he must 
choose his friends with care. The friendship of Saruman and 
the power of Orthanc cannot be lightly thrown aside, what- 
ever grievances, real or fancied, may lie behind. You have 
won a battle but not a war - and that with help on which you 
cannot count again. You may find the Shadow of the Wood 
at your own door next: it is wayward, and senseless, and has 
no love for Men. 



THE VOICE OF SARUMAN 


757 


‘But my lord of Rohan, am I to be called a murderer, 
because valiant men have fallen in battle? If you go to war, 
needlessly, for I did not desire it, then men will be slain. But 
if I am a murderer on that account, then all the House of 
Eorl is stained with murder; for they have fought many wars, 
and assailed many who defied them. Yet with some they have 
afterwards made peace, none the worse for being politic. I 
say, Theoden King: shall we have peace and friendship, you 
and I? It is ours to command.’ 

‘We will have peace,’ said Theoden at last thickly and with 
an effort. Several of the Riders cried out gladly. Theoden 
held up his hand. ‘Yes, we will have peace,’ he said, now in 
a clear voice, ‘we will have peace, when you and all your 
works have perished - and the works of your dark master to 
whom you would deliver us. You are a liar, Saruman, and a 
corrupter of men’s hearts. You hold out your hand to me, 
and I perceive only a finger of the claw of Mordor. Cruel and 
cold! Even if your war on me was just - as it was not, for 
were you ten times as wise you would have no right to rule 
me and mine for your own profit as you desired - even so, 
what will you say of your torches in Westfold and the children 
that lie dead there? And they hewed Hama’s body before the 
gates of the Hornburg, after he was dead. When you hang 
from a gibbet at your window for the sport of your own 
crows, I will have peace with you and Orthanc. So much for 
the House of Eorl. A lesser son of great sires am I, but I do 
not need to lick your fingers. Turn elsewhither. But I fear 
your voice has lost its charm.’ 

The Riders gazed up at Theoden like men startled out of 
a dream. Harsh as an old raven’s their master’s voice sounded 
in their ears after the music of Saruman. But Saruman for a 
while was beside himself with wrath. He leaned over the rail 
as if he would smite the King with his staff. To some suddenly 
it seemed that they saw a snake coiling itself to strike. 

‘Gibbets and crows!’ he hissed, and they shuddered at the 
hideous change. ‘Dotard! What is the house of Eorl but a 
thatched barn where brigands drink in the reek, and their 



758 


THE TWO TOWERS 


brats roll on the floor among the dogs? Too long have they 
escaped the gibbet themselves. But the noose comes, slow in 
the drawing, tight and hard in the end. Hang if you will!’ 
Now his voice changed, as he slowly mastered himself. ‘I 
know not why I have had the patience to speak to you. For I 
need you not, nor your little band of gallopers, as swift to fly 
as to advance, Theoden Horsemaster. Long ago I offered 
you a state beyond your merit and your wit. I have offered it 
again, so that those whom you mislead may clearly see the 
choice of roads. You give me brag and abuse. So be it. Go 
back to your huts! 

‘But you, Gandalf ! For you at least I am grieved, feeling 
for your shame. How comes it that you can endure such 
company? For you are proud, Gandalf - and not without 
reason, having a noble mind and eyes that look both deep 
and far. Even now will you not listen to my counsel?’ 

Gandalf stirred, and looked up. ‘What have you to say that 
you did not say at our last meeting?’ he asked. ‘Or, perhaps, 
you have things to unsay?’ 

Saruman paused. ‘Unsay?’ he mused, as if puzzled. 
‘Unsay? I endeavoured to advise you for your own good, but 
you scarcely listened. You are proud and do not love advice, 
having indeed a store of your own wisdom. But on that 
occasion you erred, I think, misconstruing my intentions wil- 
fully. I fear that in my eagerness to persuade you, I lost 
patience. And indeed I regret it. For I bore you no ill-will; 
and even now I bear none, though you return to me in the 
company of the violent and the ignorant. How should I? Are 
we not both members of a high and ancient order, most 
excellent in Middle-earth? Our friendship would profit us 
both alike. Much we could still accomplish together, to heal 
the disorders of the world. Let us understand one another, 
and dismiss from thought these lesser folk! Let them wait on 
our decisions! For the common good I am willing to redress 
the past, and to receive you. Will you not consult with me? 
Will you not come up?’ 

So great was the power that Saruman exerted in this last 



THE VOICE OF SARUMAN 


759 


effort that none that stood within hearing were unmoved. But 
now the spell was wholly different. They heard the gentle 
remonstrance of a kindly king with an erring but much-loved 
minister. But they were shut out, listening at a door to words 
not meant for them: ill-mannered children or stupid servants 
overhearing the elusive discourse of their elders, and wonder- 
ing how it would affect their lot. Of loftier mould these two 
were made: reverend and wise. It was inevitable that they 
should make alliance. Gandalf would ascend into the tower, 
to discuss deep things beyond their comprehension in the 
high chambers of Orthanc. The door would be closed, and 
they would be left outside, dismissed to await allotted work 
or punishment. Even in the mind of Theoden the thought 
took shape, like a shadow of doubt: ‘He will betray us; he will 
go - we shall be lost.’ 

Then Gandalf laughed. The fantasy vanished like a puff 
of smoke. 

‘Saruman, Saruman!’ said Gandalf still laughing. ‘Saruman, 
you missed your path in life. You should have been the king’s 
jester and earned your bread, and stripes too, by mimicking 
his counsellors. Ah me!’ he paused, getting the better of his 
mirth. ‘Understand one another? I fear I am beyond your 
comprehension. But you, Saruman, I understand now too 
well. I keep a clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, 
than you suppose. When last I visited you, you were the jailor 
of Mordor, and there I was to be sent. Nay, the guest who 
has escaped from the roof, will think twice before he comes 
back in by the door. Nay, I do not think I will come up. But 
listen, Saruman, for the last time! Will you not come down? 
Isengard has proved less strong than your hope and fancy 
made it. So may other things in which you still have trust. 
Would it not be well to leave it for a while? To turn to new 
things, perhaps? Think well, Saruman! Will you not come 
down?’ 

A shadow passed over Saruman’s face; then it went deathly 
white. Before he could conceal it, they saw through the mask 
the anguish of a mind in doubt, loathing to stay and dreading 



760 


THE TWO TOWERS 


to leave its refuge. For a second he hesitated, and no one 
breathed. Then he spoke, and his voice was shrill and cold. 
Pride and hate were conquering him. 

‘Will I come down?’ he mocked. ‘Does an unarmed man 
come down to speak with robbers out of doors? I can hear 
you well enough here. I am no fool, and I do not trust you, 
Gandalf. They do not stand openly on my stairs, but I know 
where the wild wood-demons are lurking, at your command.’ 

‘The treacherous are ever distrustful,’ answered Gandalf 
wearily. ‘But you need not fear for your skin. I do not wish 
to kill you, or hurt you, as you would know, if you really 
understood me. And I have the power to protect you. I am 
giving you a last chance. You can leave Orthanc, free - if you 
choose.’ 

‘That sounds well,’ sneered Saruman. ‘Very much in the 
manner of Gandalf the Grey: so condescending, and so very 
kind. I do not doubt that you would find Orthanc commodi- 
ous, and my departure convenient. But why should I wish to 
leave? And what do you mean by “free”? There are con- 
ditions, I presume?’ 

‘Reasons for leaving you can see from your windows,’ 
answered Gandalf. ‘Others will occur to your thought. Your 
servants are destroyed and scattered; your neighbours you 
have made your enemies; and you have cheated your new 
master, or tried to do so. When his eye turns hither, it will be 
the red eye of wrath. But when I say “free”, I mean “free”: 
free from bond, of chain or command: to go where you will, 
even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if you desire. But you will 
first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your staff. 
They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later, 
if you merit them.’ 

Saruman’s face grew livid, twisted with rage, and a red 
light was kindled in his eyes. He laughed wildly. ‘Later!’ he 
cried, and his voice rose to a scream. ‘Later! Yes, when you 
also have the Keys of Barad-dur itself, I suppose; and the 
crowns of seven kings, and the rods of the Five Wizards, and 
have purchased yourself a pair of boots many sizes larger 



THE VOICE OF SARUMAN 761 

than those that you wear now. A modest plan. Hardly one in 
which my help is needed! I have other things to do. Do not 
be a fool. If you wish to treat with me, while you have a 
chance, go away, and come back when you are sober! And 
leave behind these cut-throats and small rag-tag that dangle 
at your tail! Good day!’ He turned and left the balcony. 

‘Come back, Saruman!’ said Gandalf in a commanding 
voice. To the amazement of the others, Saruman turned 
again, and as if dragged against his will, he came slowly back 
to the iron rail, leaning on it, breathing hard. His face was 
lined and shrunken. His hand clutched his heavy black staff 
like a claw. 

‘I did not give you leave to go,’ said Gandalf sternly. ‘I 
have not finished. You have become a fool, Saruman, and 
yet pitiable. You might still have turned away from folly 
and evil, and have been of service. But you choose to stay 
and gnaw the ends of your old plots. Stay then! But I warn 
you, you will not easily come out again. Not unless the dark 
hands of the East stretch out to take you. Saruman!’ he cried, 
and his voice grew in power and authority. ‘Behold, I am not 
Gandalf the Grey, whom you betrayed. I am Gandalf the 
White, who has returned from death. You have no colour 
now, and I cast you from the order and from the Council.’ 

He raised his hand, and spoke slowly in a clear cold voice. 
‘Saruman, your staff is broken.’ There was a crack, and the 
staff split asunder in Saruman’ s hand, and the head of it 
fell down at Gandalf’s feet. ‘Go!’ said Gandalf. With a cry 
Saruman fell back and crawled away. At that moment a heavy 
shining thing came hurtling down from above. It glanced off 
the iron rail, even as Saruman left it, and passing close to 
Gandalf’s head, it smote the stair on which he stood. The 
rail rang and snapped. The stair cracked and splintered in 
glittering sparks. But the ball was unharmed: it rolled on 
down the steps, a globe of crystal, dark, but glowing with a 
heart of fire. As it bounded away towards a pool Pippin ran 
after it and picked it up. 

‘The murderous rogue!’ cried Eomer. But Gandalf was 



762 


THE TWO TOWERS 


unmoved. ‘No, that was not thrown by Saruman,’ he said; 
‘nor even at his bidding, I think. It came from a window far 
above. A parting shot from Master Wormtongue, I fancy, 
but ill aimed.’ 

‘The aim was poor, maybe, because he could not make 
up his mind which he hated more, you or Saruman,’ said 
Aragorn. 

‘That may be so,’ said Gandalf. ‘Small comfort will those 
two have in their companionship: they will gnaw one another 
with words. But the punishment is just. If Wormtongue 
ever comes out of Orthanc alive, it will be more than he 
deserves. 

‘Here, my lad, I’ll take that! I did not ask you to handle it,’ 
he cried, turning sharply and seeing Pippin coming up the 
steps, slowly, as if he were bearing a great weight. He went 
down to meet him and hastily took the dark globe from the 
hobbit, wrapping it in the folds of his cloak. ‘I will take care 
of this,’ he said. ‘It is not a thing, I guess, that Saruman would 
have chosen to cast away.’ 

‘But he may have other things to cast,’ said Gimli. ‘If that 
is the end of the debate, let us go out of stone’s throw, at 
least!’ 

‘It is the end,’ said Gandalf. ‘Let us go.’ 

They turned their backs on the doors of Orthanc, and 
went down. The riders hailed the king with joy, and saluted 
Gandalf. The spell of Saruman was broken: they had seen 
him come at call, and crawl away, dismissed. 

‘Well, that is done,’ said Gandalf. ‘Now I must find Tree- 
beard and tell him how things have gone.’ 

‘He will have guessed, surely?’ said Merry. Were they 
likely to end any other way?’ 

‘Not likely,’ answered Gandalf, ‘though they came to the 
balance of a hair. But I had reasons for trying; some merciful 
and some less so. First Saruman was shown that the power 
of his voice was waning. He cannot be both tyrant and coun- 
sellor. When the plot is ripe it remains no longer secret. 



THE VOICE OF SARUMAN 763 

Yet he fell into the trap, and tried to deal with his victims 
piece-meal, while others listened. Then I gave him a last 
choice and a fair one: to renounce both Mordor and his 
private schemes, and make amends by helping us in our need. 
He knows our need, none better. Great service he could have 
rendered. But he has chosen to withhold it, and keep the 
power of Orthanc. He will not serve, only command. He lives 
now in terror of the shadow of Mordor, and yet he still dreams 
of riding the storm. Unhappy fool! He will be devoured, if 
the power of the East stretches out its arms to Isengard. We 
cannot destroy Orthanc from without, but Sauron - who 
knows what he can do?’ 

‘And what if Sauron does not conquer? What will you do 
to him?’ asked Pippin. 

‘I? Nothing!’ said Gandalf. ‘I will do nothing to him. I do 
not wish for mastery. What will become of him? I cannot say. 
I grieve that so much that was good now festers in the tower. 
Still for us things have not gone badly. Strange are the turns 
of fortune! Often does hatred hurt itself! I guess that, even if 
we had entered in, we could have found few treasures in 
Orthanc more precious than the thing which Wormtongue 
threw down at us.’ 

A shrill shriek, suddenly cut off, came from an open 
window high above. 

‘It seems that Saruman thinks so too,’ said Gandalf. ‘Let 
us leave them!’ 

They returned now to the ruins of the gate. Hardly had 
they passed out under the arch, when, from among the 
shadows of the piled stones where they had stood, Treebeard 
and a dozen other Ents came striding up. Aragorn, Gimli 
and Legolas gazed at them in wonder. 

‘Here are three of my companions, Treebeard,’ said 
Gandalf. ‘I have spoken of them, but you have not yet seen 
them.’ He named them one by one. 

The Old Ent looked at them long and searchingly, and 
spoke to them in turn. Last he turned to Legolas. ‘So you 



764 the two towers 

have come all the way from Mirkwood, my good Elf? A very 
great forest it used to be!’ 

‘And still is,’ said Legolas. ‘But not so great that we who 
dwell there ever tire of seeing new trees. I should dearly love 
to journey in Fangorn’s Wood. I scarcely passed beyond the 
eaves of it, and I did not wish to turn back.’ 

Treebeard’s eyes gleamed with pleasure. ‘I hope you may 
have your wish, ere the hills be much older,’ he said. 

‘I will come, if I have the fortune,’ said Legolas. ‘I have 
made a bargain with my friend that, if all goes well, we will 
visit Fangorn together - by your leave.’ 

‘Any Elf that comes with you will be welcome,’ said 
Treebeard. 

‘The friend I speak of is not an Elf,’ said Legolas; ‘I mean 
Gimli, Gloin’s son here.’ Gimli bowed low, and the axe 
slipped from his belt and clattered on the ground. 

‘Hoorn, hm! Ah now,’ said Treebeard, looking dark-eyed 
at him. ‘A dwarf and an axe-bearer! Hoorn! I have good will 
to Elves; but you ask much. This is a strange friendship!’ 

‘Strange it may seem,’ said Legolas; ‘but while Gimli lives 
I shall not come to Fangorn alone. His axe is not for trees, 
but for orc-necks, O Fangorn, Master of Fangorn’s Wood. 
Forty-two he hewed in the battle.’ 

‘Hoo! Come now!’ said Treebeard. ‘That is a better story! 
Well, well, things will go as they will; and there is no need to 
hurry to meet them. But now we must part for a while. Day 
is drawing to an end, yet Gandalf says you must go ere 
nightfall, and the Lord of the Mark is eager for his own 
house.’ 

‘Yes, we must go, and go now,’ said Gandalf. ‘I fear that I 
must take your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage 
well enough without them.’ 

‘Maybe I shall,’ said Treebeard. ‘But I shall miss them. We 
have become friends in so short a while that I think I must 
be getting hasty - growing backwards towards youth, per- 
haps. But there, they are the first new thing under Sun or 
Moon that I have seen for many a long, long day. I shall not 



THE VOICE OF SARUMAN 765 

forget them. I have put their names into the Long List. Ents 
will remember it. 

Ents the earthbom, old as mountains, 
the wide-walkers, water drinking; 
and hungry as hunters, the Hobbit children, 
the laughing-folk, the little people, 

they shall remain friends as long as leaves are renewed. Fare 
you well! But if you hear news up in your pleasant land, in 
the Shire, send me word! You know what I mean: word or 
sight of the Entwives. Come yourselves if you can!’ 

‘We will!’ said Merry and Pippin together, and they turned 
away hastily. Treebeard looked at them, and was silent for 
a while, shaking his head thoughtfully. Then he turned to 
Gandalf. 

‘So Saruman would not leave?’ he said. ‘I did not think he 
would. His heart is as rotten as a black Huorn’s. Still, if I 
were overcome and all my trees destroyed, I would not come 
while I had one dark hole left to hide in.’ 

‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘But you have not plotted to cover all 
the world with your trees and choke all other living things. 
But there it is, Saruman remains to nurse his hatred and 
weave again such webs as he can. He has the Key of Orthanc. 
But he must not be allowed to escape.’ 

‘Indeed no! Ents will see to that,’ said Treebeard. ‘Saruman 
shall not set foot beyond the rock, without my leave. Ents 
will watch over him.’ 

‘Good!’ said Gandalf. ‘That is what I hoped. Now I can 
go and turn to other matters with one care the less. But you 
must be wary. The waters have gone down. It will not be 
enough to put sentinels round the tower, I fear. I do not 
doubt that there were deep ways delved under Orthanc, and 
that Saruman hopes to go and come unmarked, before long. 
If you will undertake the labour, I beg you to pour in the 
waters again; and do so, until Isengard remains a standing 
pool, or you discover the outlets. When all the underground 



766 


THE TWO TOWERS 


places are drowned, and the outlets blocked, then Saruman 
must stay upstairs and look out of the windows.’ 

‘Leave it to the Ents!’ said Treebeard. ‘We shall search the 
valley from head to foot and peer under every pebble. Trees 
are coming back to live here, old trees, wild trees. The 
Watchwood we will call it. Not a squirrel will go here, but I 
shall know of it. Leave it to Ents! Until seven times the years 
in which he tormented us have passed, we shall not tire of 
watching him.’ 



Chapter n 


THE PALANTIR 


The sun was sinking behind the long western arm of the 
mountains when Gandalf and his companions, and the king 
with his Riders, set out again from Isengard. Gandalf took 
Merry behind him, and Aragorn took Pippin. Two of the 
lung’s men went on ahead, riding swiftly, and passed soon 
out of sight down into the valley. The others followed at an 
easy pace. 

Ents in a solemn row stood like statues at the gate, with 
their long arms uplifted, but they made no sound. Merry and 
Pippin looked back, when they had passed some way down 
the winding road. Sunlight was still shining in the sky, but 
long shadows reached over Isengard: grey ruins falling into 
darkness. Treebeard stood alone there now, like the distant 
stump of an old tree: the hobbits thought of their first meet- 
ing, upon the sunny ledge far away on the borders of 
Fangorn. 

They came to the pillar of the White Hand. The pillar was 
still standing, but the graven hand had been thrown down 
and broken into small pieces. Right in the middle of the road 
the long forefinger lay, white in the dusk, its red nail darken- 
ing to black. 

‘The Ents pay attention to every detail!’ said Gandalf. 

They rode on, and evening deepened in the valley. 

‘Are we riding far tonight, Gandalf?’ asked Merry after a 
while. ‘I don’t know how you feel with small rag- tag dangling 
behind you; but the rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop 
dangling and lie down.’ 

‘So you heard that?’ said Gandalf. ‘Don’t let it rankle! Be 
thankful no longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes 


768 


THE TWO TOWERS 


on you. If it is any comfort to your pride, I should say that, 
at the moment, you and Pippin are more in his thoughts than 
all the rest of us. Who you are; how you came there, and 
why; what you know; whether you were captured, and if 
so, how you escaped when all the Ores perished - it is with 
those little riddles that the great mind of Saruman is troubled. 
A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if you feel 
honoured by his concern.’ 

‘Thank you!’ said Merry. ‘But it is a greater honour to 
dangle at your tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position 
one has a chance of putting a question a second time. Are 
we riding far tonight?’ 

Gandalf laughed. ‘A most unquenchable hobbit! All 
Wizards should have a hobbit or two in their care - to teach 
them the meaning of the word, and to correct them. I beg 
your pardon. But I have given thought even to these simple 
matters. We will ride for a few hours, gently, until we come 
to the end of the valley. Tomorrow we must ride faster. 

When we came, we meant to go straight from Isengard 
back to the king’s house at Edoras over the plains, a ride of 
some days. But we have taken thought and changed the 
plan. Messengers have gone ahead to Helm’s Deep, to warn 
them that the king is returning tomorrow. He will ride from 
there with many men to Dunharrow by paths among the 
hills. From now on no more than two or three together are 
to go openly over the land, by day or night, when it can be 
avoided.’ 

‘Nothing or a double helping is your way!’ said Merry. ‘I 
am afraid I was not looking beyond tonight’s bed. Where and 
what are Helm’s Deep and all the rest of it? I don’t know 
anything about this country.’ 

‘Then you’d best learn something, if you wish to under- 
stand what is happening. But not just now, and not from me: 
I have too many pressing things to think about.’ 

‘All right, I’ll tackle Strider by the camp-fire: he’s less testy. 
But why all this secrecy? I thought we’d won the battle!’ 

‘Yes, we have won, but only the first victory, and that in 



THE PALANTIR 


769 


itself increases our danger. There was some link between 
Isengard and Mordor, which I have not yet fathomed. How 
they exchanged news I am not sure; but they did so. The 
Eye of Barad-dur will be looking impatiently towards the 
Wizard’s Vale, I think; and towards Rohan. The less it sees 
the better.’ 

The road passed slowly, winding down the valley. Now 
further, and now nearer Isen flowed in its stony bed. Night 
came down from the mountains. All the mists were gone. A 
chill wind blew. The moon, now waxing round, filled the 
eastern sky with a pale cold sheen. The shoulders of the 
mountain to their right sloped down to bare hills. The wide 
plains opened grey before them. 

At last they halted. Then they turned aside, leaving the 
highway and taking to the sweet upland turf again. Going 
westward a mile or so they came to a dale. It opened south- 
ward, leaning back into the slope of round Dol Baran, the 
last hill of the northern ranges, greenfooted, crowned with 
heather. The sides of the glen were shaggy with last year’s 
bracken, among which the tight-curled fronds of spring were 
just thrusting through the sweet-scented earth. Thornbushes 
grew thick upon the low banks, and under them they made 
their camp, two hours or so before the middle of the night. 
They lit a fire in a hollow, down among the roots of a spread- 
ing hawthorn, tall as a tree, writhen with age, but hale in 
every limb. Buds were swelling at each twig’s tip. 

Guards were set, two at a watch. The rest, after they had 
supped, wrapped themselves in a cloak and blanket and slept. 
The hobbits lay in a corner by themselves upon a pile of old 
bracken. Merry was sleepy, but Pippin now seemed curiously 
restless. The bracken cracked and rustled, as he twisted and 
turned. 

‘What’s the matter?’ asked Merry. ‘Are you lying on an 
ant-h ill ?’ 

‘No,’ said Pippin, ‘but I’m not comfortable. I wonder how 
long it is since I slept in a bed?’ 



77 ° 


THE TWO TOWERS 


Merry yawned. ‘Work it out on your fingers!’ he said. ‘But 
you must know how long it is since we left Lorien.’ 

‘Oh, that!’ said Pippin. ‘I mean a real bed in a bedroom.’ 
‘Well, Rivendell then,’ said Merry. ‘But I could sleep any- 
where tonight.’ 

‘You had the luck, Merry,’ said Pippin softly, after a pause. 
‘You were riding with Gandalf.’ 

‘Well, what of it?’ 

‘Did you get any news, any information out of him?’ 

‘Yes, a good deal. More than usual. But you heard it all or 
most of it; you were close by, and we were talking no secrets. 
But you can go with him tomorrow, if you think you can get 
more out of him - and if he’ll have you.’ 

‘Can I? Good! But he’s close, isn’t he? Not changed at all.’ 
‘Oh yes, he is!’ said Merry, waking up a little, and begin- 
ning to wonder what was bothering his companion. ‘He has 
grown, or something. He can be both kinder and more alarm- 
ing, merrier and more solemn than before, I think. He has 
changed; but we have not had a chance to see how much, 
yet. But think of the last part of that business with Saruman! 
Remember Saruman was once Gandalf ’s superior: head of 
the Council, whatever that may be exactly. He was Saruman 
the White. Gandalf is the White now. Saruman came when 
he was told, and his rod was taken; and then he was just told 
to go, and he went!’ 

Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he’s closer than 
ever that’s all,’ Pippin argued. ‘That — glass ball, now. He 
seemed mighty pleased with it. He knows or guesses some- 
thing about it. But does he tell us what? No, not a word. Yet 
I picked it up, and I saved it from rolling into a pool. Here, 
I’ll take that, my lad - that’s all. I wonder what it is? It felt so 
very heavy.’ Pippin’s voice fell very low, as if he was talking 
to himself. 

‘Hullo!’ said Merry. ‘So that’s what is bothering you? Now, 
Pippin my lad, don’t forget Gildor’s saying - the one Sam 
used to quote: Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for they 
are subtle and quick to anger.’ 



THE PALANTIR 


771 


‘But our whole life for months has been one long meddling 
in the affairs of Wizards,’ said Pippin. ‘I should like a bit of 
information as well as danger. I should like a look at that 
ball.’ 

‘Go to sleep!’ said Merry. ‘You’ll get information enough, 
sooner or later. My dear Pippin, no Took ever beat a Brandy- 
buck for inquisitiveness; but is this the time, I ask you?’ 

‘All right! What’s the harm in my telling you what I should 
like: a look at that stone? I know I can’t have it, with old 
Gandalf sitting on it, like a hen on an egg. But it doesn’t 
help much to get no more from you than a you-can’t-have-it 
so-go-to-sleepV 

Well, what else could I say?’ said Merry. ‘I’m sorry, 
Pippin, but you really must wait till the morning. I’ll be as 
curious as you like after breakfast, and I’ll help in any way I 
can at wizard-wheedling. But I can’t keep awake any longer. 
If I yawn any more, I shall split at the ears. Good night!’ 

Pippin said no more. He lay still now, but sleep remained 
far away; and it was not encouraged by the sound of Merry 
breathing softly, asleep in a few minutes after saying good 
night. The thought of the dark globe seemed to grow stronger 
as all grew quiet. Pippin felt again its weight in his hands, 
and saw again the mysterious red depths into which he had 
looked for a moment. He tossed and turned and tried to think 
of something else. 

At last he could stand it no longer. He got up and looked 
round. It was chilly, and he wrapped his cloak about him. 
The moon was shining cold and white, down into the dell, 
and the shadows of the bushes were black. All about lay 
sleeping shapes. The two guards were not in view: they were 
up on the hill, perhaps, or hidden in the bracken. Driven by 
some impulse that he did not understand, Pippin walked 
softly to where Gandalf lay. He looked down at him. The 
wizard seemed asleep, but with lids not fully closed: there 
was a glitter of eyes under his long lashes. Pippin stepped 
back hastily. But Gandalf made no sign; and drawn forward 



772 


THE TWO TOWERS 


once more, half against his will, the hobbit crept up again 
from behind the wizard’s head. He was rolled in a blanket, 
with his cloak spread over the top; and close beside him, 
between his right side and his bent arm, there was a hum- 
mock, something round wrapped in a dark cloth; his hand 
seemed only just to have slipped off it to the ground. 

Hardly breathing, Pippin crept nearer, foot by foot. At last 
he knelt down. Then he put his hands out stealthily, and 
slowly lifted the lump up: it did not seem quite so heavy as 
he had expected. ‘Only some bundle of oddments, perhaps, 
after all,’ he thought with a strange sense of relief; but he did 
not put the bundle down again. He stood for a moment 
clasping it. Then an idea came into his mind. He tiptoed 
away, found a large stone, and came back. 

Quickly now he drew off the cloth, wrapped the stone in 
it and kneeling down, laid it back by the wizard’s hand. Then 
at last he looked at the thing that he had uncovered. There it 
was: a smooth globe of crystal, now dark and dead, lying bare 
before his knees. Pippin lifted it, covered it hurriedly in his 
own cloak, and half turned to go back to his bed. At that 
moment Gandalf moved in his sleep, and muttered some 
words: they seemed to be in a strange tongue; his hand groped 
out and clasped the wrapped stone, then he sighed and did 
not move again. 

‘You idiotic fool!’ Pippin muttered to himself. ‘You’re 
going to get yourself into frightful trouble. Put it back quick!’ 
But he found now that his knees quaked, and he did not dare 
to go near enough to the wizard to reach the bundle. ‘I’ll 
never get it back now without waking him,’ he thought, ‘not 
till Pm a bit calmer. So I may as well have a look first. Not 
just here though!’ He stole away, and sat down on a green 
hillock not far from his bed. The moon looked in over the 
edge of the dell. 

Pippin sat with his knees drawn up and the ball between 
them. He bent low over it, looking like a greedy child stooping 
over a bowl of food, in a corner away from others. He drew 
his cloak aside and gazed at it. The air seemed still and tense 



THE PALANTIR 


773 


about him. At first the globe was dark, black as jet, with the 
moonlight gleaming on its surface. Then there came a faint 
glow and stir in the heart of it, and it held his eyes, so that 
now he could not look away. Soon all the inside seemed on 
fire; the ball was spinning, or the lights within were revolving. 
Suddenly the lights went out. He gave a gasp and struggled; 
but he remained bent, clasping the ball with both hands. 
Closer and closer he bent, and then became rigid; his lips 
moved soundlessly for a while. Then with a strangled cry he 
fell back and lay still. 

The cry was piercing. The guards leapt down from the 
banks. All the camp was soon astir. 

‘So this is the thief!’ said Gandalf. Hastily he cast his cloak 
over the globe where it lay. ‘But you, Pippin! This is a griev- 
ous turn to things!’ He knelt by Pippin’s body: the hobbit 
was lying on his back, rigid, with unseeing eyes staring up at 
the sky. ‘The devilry! What mischief has he done - to himself, 
and to all of us?’ The wizard’s face was drawn and haggard. 

He took Pippin’s hand and bent over his face, listening for 
his breath; then he laid his hands on his brow. The hobbit 
shuddered. His eyes closed. He cried out; and sat up, staring 
in bewilderment at all the faces round him, pale in the 
moonlight. 

‘It is not for you, Saruman!’ he cried in a shrill and toneless 
voice, shrinking away from Gandalf. ‘I will send for it at once. 
Do you understand? Say just that!’ Then he struggled to get 
up and escape, but Gandalf held him gently and firmly. 

‘Peregrin Took!’ he said. ‘Come back!’ 

The hobbit relaxed and fell back, clinging to the wizard’s 
hand. ‘Gandalf!’ he cried. ‘Gandalf! Forgive me!’ 

‘Forgive you?’ said the wizard. ‘Tell me first what you have 
done!’ 

‘I, I took the ball and looked at it,’ stammered Pippin; ‘and 
I saw things that frightened me. And I wanted to go away, 
but I couldn’t. And then he came and questioned me; and he 
looked at me, and, and, that is all I remember.’ 



774 


THE TWO TOWERS 


‘That won’t do,’ said Gandalf sternly. ‘What did you see, 
and what did you say?’ 

Pippin shut his eyes and shivered, but said nothing. They 
all stared at him in silence, except Merry who turned away. 
But Gandalf’s face was still hard. ‘Speak!’ he said. 

In a low hesitating voice Pippin began again, and slowly 
his words grew clearer and stronger. ‘I saw a dark sky, and 
tall battlements,’ he said. ‘And tiny stars. It seemed very far 
away and long ago, yet hard and clear. Then the stars went 
in and out - they were cut off by things with wings. Very big, 
I think, really; but in the glass they looked like bats wheeling 
round the tower. I thought there were nine of them. One 
began to fly straight towards me, getting bigger and bigger. 
It had a horrible - no, no! I can’t say. 

‘I tried to get away, because I thought it would fly out; but 
when it had covered all the globe, it disappeared. Then he 
came. He did not speak so that I could hear words. He just 
looked, and I understood. 

‘“So you have come back? Why have you neglected to 
report for so long?” 

‘I did not answer. He said: “Who are you?” I still did not 
answer, but it hurt me horribly; and he pressed me, so I said: 
“A hobbit.” 

‘Then suddenly he seemed to see me, and he laughed at 
me. It was cruel. It was like being stabbed with knives. I 
struggled. But he said: “Wait a moment! We shall meet again 
soon. Tell Saruman that this dainty is not for him. I will send 
for it at once. Do you understand? Say just that!” 

‘Then he gloated over me. I felt I was falling to pieces. 
No, no! I can’t say any more. I don’t remember anything 
else.’ 

‘Look at me!’ said Gandalf. 

Pippin looked up straight into his eyes. The wizard held 
his gaze for a moment in silence. Then his face grew gentler, 
and the shadow of a smile appeared. He laid his hand softly 
on Pippin’s head. 

‘All right!’ he said. ‘Say no more! You have taken no harm. 



THE PALANTIR 


775 


There is no lie in your eyes, as I feared. But he did not 
speak long with you. A fool, but an honest fool, you remain, 
Peregrin Took. Wiser ones might have done worse in such a 
pass. But mark this! You have been saved, and all your friends 
too, mainly by good fortune, as it is called. You cannot count 
on it a second time. If he had questioned you, then and there, 
almost certainly you would have told all that you know, to 
the ruin of us all. But he was too eager. He did not want 
information only: he wanted you, quickly, so that he could 
deal with you in the Dark Tower, slowly. Don’t shudder! If 
you will meddle in the affairs of Wizards, you must be pre- 
pared to think of such things. But come! I forgive you. Be 
comforted! Things have not turned out as evilly as they 
might.’ 

He lifted Pippin gently and carried him back to his bed. 
Merry followed, and sat down beside him. ‘Lie there and 
rest, if you can, Pippin!’ said Gandalf. ‘Trust me. If you feel 
an itch in your palms again, tell me of it! Such things can be 
cured. But anyway, my dear hobbit, don’t put a lump of rock 
under my elbow again! Now, I will leave you two together 
for a while.’ 

With that Gandalf returned to the others, who were still 
standing by the Orthanc-stone in troubled thought. ‘Peril 
comes in the night when least expected,’ he said. We have 
had a narrow escape!’ 

‘How is the hobbit, Pippin?’ asked Aragorn. 

‘I think all will be well now,’ answered Gandalf. ‘He was 
not held long, and hobbits have an amazing power of re- 
covery. The memory, or the horror of it, will probably fade 
quickly. Too quickly, perhaps. Will you, Aragorn, take the 
Orthanc-stone and guard it? It is a dangerous charge.’ 

‘Dangerous indeed, but not to all,’ said Aragorn. ‘There is 
one who may claim it by right. For this assuredly is the 
palantir of Orthanc from the treasury of Elendil, set here by 
the Kings of Gondor. Now my hour draws near. I will take it.’ 

Gandalf looked at Aragorn, and then, to the surprise of the 



776 


THE TWO TOWERS 


others, he lifted the covered Stone, and bowed as he pre- 
sented it. 

‘Receive it, lord!’ he said: ‘in earnest of other things that 
shall be given back. But if I may counsel you in the use of 
your own, do not use it - yet! Be wary!’ 

‘When have I been hasty or unwary, who have waited and 
prepared for so many long years?’ said Aragorn. 

‘Never yet. Do not then stumble at the end of the road,’ 
answered Gandalf. ‘But at the least keep this thing secret. 
You, and all others that stand here! The hobbit, Peregrin, 
above all should not know where it is bestowed. The evil fit 
may come on him again. For alas! he has handled it and 
looked in it, as should never have happened. He ought never 
to have touched it in Isengard, and there I should have been 
quicker. But my mind was bent on Saruman, and I did not 
at once guess the nature of the Stone. Then I was weary, and 
as I lay pondering it, sleep overcame me. Now I know!’ 

‘Yes, there can be no doubt,’ said Aragorn. ‘At last we 
know the link between Isengard and Mordor, and how it 
worked. Much is explained.’ 

‘Strange powers have our enemies, and strange weak- 
nesses!’ said Theoden. ‘But it has long been said: oft evil will 
shall evil mar .’ 

‘That many times is seen,’ said Gandalf. ‘But at this time 
we have been strangely fortunate. Maybe, I have been saved 
by this hobbit from a grave blunder. I had considered whether 
or not to probe this Stone myself to find its uses. Had I done 
so, I should have been revealed to him myself. I am not ready 
for such a trial, if indeed I shall ever be so. But even if I 
found the power to withdraw myself, it would be disastrous 
for him to see me, yet - until the hour comes when secrecy 
will avail no longer.’ 

‘That hour is now come, I think,’ said Aragorn. 

‘Not yet,’ said Gandalf. ‘There remains a short while of 
doubt, which we must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought 
that the Stone was in Orthanc - why should he not? And that 
therefore the hobbit was captive there, driven to look in the 



