THE PALANTIR 


111 


glass for his torment by Saruman. That dark mind will be 
filled now with the voice and face of the hobbit and with 
expectation: it may take some time before he learns his error. 
We must snatch that time. We have been too leisurely. We 
must move. The neighbourhood of Isengard is no place now 
to linger in. I will ride ahead at once with Peregrin Took. It 
will be better for him than lying in the dark while others 
sleep.’ 

‘I will keep Eomer and ten Riders,’ said the king. ‘They 
shall ride with me at early day. The rest may go with Aragorn 
and ride as soon as they have a mind.’ 

‘As you will,’ said Gandalf. ‘But make all the speed you 
may to the cover of the hills, to Helm’s Deep!’ 

At that moment a shadow fell over them. The bright moon- 
light seemed to be suddenly cut off. Several of the Riders 
cried out, and crouched, holding their arms above their 
heads, as if to ward off a blow from above: a blind fear and 
a deadly cold fell on them. Cowering they looked up. A vast 
winged shape passed over the moon like a black cloud. It 
wheeled and went north, flying at a speed greater than 
any wind of Middle-earth. The stars fainted before it. It was 
gone. 

They stood up, rigid as stones. Gandalf was gazing up, his 
arms out and downwards, stiff, his hands clenched. 

‘Nazgul!’ he cried. ‘The messenger of Mordor. The storm 
is coming. The Nazgul have crossed the River! Ride, ride! 
Wait not for the dawn! Let not the swift wait for the slow! 
Ride!’ 

He sprang away, calling Shadowfax as he ran. Aragorn 
followed him. Going to Pippin, Gandalf picked him up in his 
arms. ‘You shall come with me this time,’ he said. ‘Shadowfax 
shall show you his paces.’ Then he ran to the place where he 
had slept. Shadowfax stood there already. Slinging the small 
bag which was all his luggage across his shoulders, the wizard 
leapt upon the horse’s back. Aragorn lifted Pippin and set 
him in Gandalf ’s arms, wrapped in cloak and blanket. 



778 


THE TWO TOWERS 


‘Farewell! Follow fast!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Away, Shadowfax!’ 
The great horse tossed his head. His flowing tail flicked in 
the moonlight. Then he leapt forward, spurning the earth, 
and was gone like the north wind from the mountains. 

‘A beautiful, restful night!’ said Merry to Aragorn. ‘Some 
folk have wonderful luck. Fie did not want to sleep, and he 
wanted to ride with Gandalf - and there he goes! Instead of 
being turned into a stone himself to stand here for ever as a 
warning.’ 

‘If you had been the first to lift the Orthanc-stone, and not 
he, how would it be now?’ said Aragorn. ‘You might have 
done worse. Who can say? But now it is your luck to come 
with me, I fear. At once. Go and get ready, and bring any- 
thing that Pippin left behind. Make haste!’ 

Over the plains Shadowfax was flying, needing no urging 
and no guidance. Less than an hour had passed, and they 
had reached the Fords of Isen and crossed them. The Mound 
of the Riders and its cold spears lay grey behind them. 

Pippin was recovering. Fie was warm, but the wind in his 
face was keen and refreshing. He was with Gandalf. The 
horror of the Stone and of the hideous shadow over the moon 
was fading, things left behind in the mists of the mountains 
or in a passing dream. He drew a deep breath. 

‘I did not know you rode bare -back, Gandalf,’ he said. 
‘You haven’t a saddle or a bridle!’ 

‘I do not ride elf-fashion, except on Shadowfax,’ said 
Gandalf. ‘But Shadowfax will have no harness. You do not 
ride Shadowfax: he is willing to carry you - or not. If he is 
willing, that is enough. It is then his business to see that you 
remain on his back, unless you jump off into the air.’ 

‘How fast is he going?’ asked Pippin. ‘Fast by the wind, 
but very smooth. And how light his footfalls are!’ 

‘He is running now as fast as the swiftest horse could 
gallop,’ answered Gandalf; ‘but that is not fast for him. The 
land is rising a little here, and is more broken than it was 



THE PALANTIR 


779 


beyond the river. But see how the White Mountains are draw- 
ing near under the stars! Yonder are the Thrihyrne peaks like 
black spears. It will not be long before we reach the branching 
roads and come to the Deeping-coomb, where the battle was 
fought two nights ago.’ 

Pippin was silent again for a while. He heard Gandalf 
singing softly to himself, murmuring brief snatches of rhyme 
in many tongues, as the miles ran under them. At last the 
wizard passed into a song of which the hobbit caught the 
words: a few lines came clear to his ears through the rushing 
of the wind: 

Tall ships and tall kings 
Three times three, 

What brought they from the foundered land 
Over the flowing sea? 

Seven stars and seven stones 
And one white tree. 

What are you saying, Gandalf?’ asked Pippin. 

‘I was just running over some of the Rhymes of Lore in 
my mind,’ answered the wizard. ‘Hobbits, I suppose, have 
forgotten them, even those that they ever knew.’ 

‘No, not all,’ said Pippin. ‘And we have many of our own, 
which wouldn’t interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard 
this one. What is it about - the seven stars and seven stones?’ 

‘About the palantiri of the Kings of Old,’ said Gandalf. 

‘And what are they?’ 

‘The name meant that which looks far away. The Orthanc- 
stone was one.’ 

‘Then it was not made, not made’ - Pippin hesitated - ‘by 
the Enemy?’ 

‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘Nor by Saruman. It is beyond his art, 
and beyond Sauron’s too. The palantiri came from beyond 
Westernesse, from Eldamar. The Noldor made them. Feanor 
himself, maybe, wrought them, in days so long ago that the 
time cannot be measured in years. But there is nothing that 



THE TWO TOWERS 


780 

Sauron cannot turn to evil uses. Alas for Saruman! It was his 
downfall, as I now perceive. Perilous to us all are the devices 
of an art deeper than we possess ourselves. Yet he must bear 
the blame. Fool! to keep it secret, for his own profit. No word 
did he ever speak of it to any of the Council. We had not yet 
given thought to the fate of the palantiri of Gondor in its 
ruinous wars. By Men they were almost forgotten. Even in 
Gondor they were a secret known only to a few; in Arnor 
they were remembered only in a rhyme of lore among the 
Dunedain.’ 

What did the Men of old use them for?’ asked Pippin, 
delighted and astonished at getting answers to so many ques- 
tions, and wondering how long it would last. 

‘To see far off, and to converse in thought with one 
another,’ said Gandalf. ‘In that way they long guarded and 
united the realm of Gondor. They set up Stones at Minas 
Anor, and at Minas Ithil, and at Orthanc in the ring of Isen- 
gard. The chief and master of these was under the Dome of 
Stars at Osgiliath before its ruin. The three others were far 
away in the North. In the house of Elrond it is told that they 
were at Annuminas, and Amon Sul, and Elendil’s Stone was 
on the Tower Hills that look towards Mithlond in the Gulf 
of Lune where the grey ships lie. 

‘Each palantir replied to each, but all those in Gondor were 
ever open to the view of Osgiliath. Now it appears that, as 
the rock of Orthanc has withstood the storms of time, so 
there the palantir of that tower has remained. But alone it 
could do nothing but see small images of things far off and 
days remote. Very useful, no doubt, that was to Saruman; 
yet it seems that he was not content. Further and further 
abroad he gazed, until he cast his gaze upon Barad-dur. Then 
he was caught! 

Who knows where the lost Stones of Arnor and Gondor 
now lie, buried, or drowned deep? But one at least Sauron 
must have obtained and mastered to his purposes. I guess 
that it was the Ithil-stone, for he took Minas Ithil long ago 
and turned it into an evil place: Minas Morgul, it has become. 



THE PALANTIR 


781 


‘Easy it is now to guess how quickly the roving eye of 
Saruman was trapped and held; and how ever since he has 
been persuaded from afar, and daunted when persuasion 
would not serve. The biter bit, the hawk under the eagle’s 
foot, the spider in a steel web! How long, I wonder, has he 
been constrained to come often to his glass for inspection 
and instruction, and the Orthanc-stone so bent towards 
Barad-dur that, if any save a will of adamant now looks into 
it, it will bear his mind and sight swiftly thither? And how it 
draws one to itself! Have I not felt it? Even now my heart 
desires to test my will upon it, to see if I could not wrench it 
from him and turn it where I would - to look across the wide 
seas of water and of time to Tirion the Fair, and perceive the 
unimaginable hand and mind of Feanor at their work, while 
both the White Tree and the Golden were in flower!’ He 
sighed and fell silent. 

‘I wish I had known all this before,’ said Pippin. ‘I had no 
notion of what I was doing.’ 

‘Oh yes, you had,’ said Gandalf. ‘You knew you were 
behaving wrongly and foolishly; and you told yourself so, 
though you did not listen. I did not tell you all this before, 
because it is only by musing on all that has happened that I 
have at last understood, even as we ride together. But if I had 
spoken sooner, it would not have lessened your desire, 
or made it easier to resist. On the contrary! No, the burned 
hand teaches best. After that advice about fire goes to the 
heart.’ 

‘It does,’ said Pippin. ‘If all the seven stones were laid out 
before me now, I should shut my eyes and put my hands in 
my pockets.’ 

‘Good!’ said Gandalf. ‘That is what I hoped.’ 

‘But I should like to know ’ Pippin began. 

‘Mercy!’ cried Gandalf. ‘If the giving of information is to 
be the cure of your inquisitiveness, I shall spend all the rest 
of my days in answering you. What more do you want to 
know?’ 

‘The names of all the stars, and of all living things, and the 



782 


THE TWO TOWERS 


whole history of Middle-earth and Over-heaven and of the 
Sundering Seas,’ laughed Pippin. ‘Of course! What less? But 
I am not in a hurry tonight. At the moment I was just wonder- 
ing about the black shadow. I heard you shout “messenger 
of Mordor”. What was it? What could it do at Isengard?’ 

‘It was a Black Rider on wings, a Nazgul,’ said Gandalf. 
‘It could have taken you away to the Dark Tower.’ 

‘But it was not coming for me, was it?’ faltered Pippin. ‘I 
mean, it didn’t know that I had . . .’ 

‘Of course not,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is two hundred leagues 
or more in straight flight from Barad-dur to Orthanc, and 
even a Nazgul would take a few hours to fly between them. 
But Saruman certainly looked in the Stone since the ore-raid, 
and more of his secret thought, I do not doubt, has been read 
than he intended. A messenger has been sent to find out what 
he is doing. And after what has happened tonight another 
will come, I think, and swiftly. So Saruman will come to the 
last pinch of the vice that he has put his hand in. He has no 
captive to send. He has no Stone to see with, and cannot 
answer the summons. Sauron will only believe that he is 
withholding the captive and refusing to use the Stone. It will 
not help Saruman to tell the truth to the messenger. For 
Isengard may be ruined, yet he is still safe in Orthanc. So 
whether he will or no, he will appear a rebel. Yet he rejected 
us, so as to avoid that very thing! What he will do in such a 
plight, I cannot guess. He has power still, I think, while in 
Orthanc, to resist the Nine Riders. He may try to do so. He 
may try to trap the Nazgul, or at least to slay the thing on 
which it now rides the air. In that case let Rohan look to its 
horses! 

‘But I cannot tell how it will fall out, well or ill for us. It 
may be that the counsels of the Enemy will be confused, or 
hindered by his wrath with Saruman. It may be that he will 
learn that I was there and stood upon the stairs of Orthanc - 
with hobbits at my tail. Or that an heir of Elendil lives and 
stood beside me. If Wormtongue was not deceived by the 
armour of Rohan, he would remember Aragorn and the title 



THE PALANTIR 


783 


that he claimed. That is what I fear. And so we fly - not from 
danger but into greater danger. Every stride of Shadowfax 
bears you nearer to the Land of Shadow, Peregrin Took.’ 

Pippin made no answer, but clutched his cloak, as if 
a sudden chill had struck him. Grey land passed under 
them. 

‘See now!’ said Gandalf. ‘The Westfold dales are opening 
before us. Here we come back to the eastward road. The 
dark shadow yonder is the mouth of the Deeping-coomb. 
That way lies Aglarond and the Glittering Caves. Do not ask 
me about them. Ask Gimli, if you meet again, and for the 
first time you may get an answer longer than you wish. You 
will not see the caves yourself, not on this journey. Soon they 
will be far behind.’ 

‘I thought you were going to stop at Helm’s Deep!’ said 
Pippin. ‘Where are you going then?’ 

‘To Minas Tirith, before the seas of war surround it.’ 

‘Oh! And how far is that?’ 

‘Leagues upon leagues,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Thrice as far 
as the dwellings of King Theoden, and they are more than a 
hundred miles east from here, as the messengers of Mordor 
fly. Shadowfax must run a longer road. Which will prove the 
swifter? 

We shall ride now till daybreak, and that is some hours 
away. Then even Shadowfax must rest, in some hollow of 
the hills: at Edoras, I hope. Sleep, if you can! You may see 
the first glimmer of dawn upon the golden roof of the house 
of Eorl. And in three days thence you shall see the purple 
shadow of Mount Mindolluin and the walls of the tower of 
Denethor white in the morning. 

‘Away now, Shadowfax! Run, greatheart, run as you have 
never run before! Now we are come to the lands where you 
were foaled, and every stone you know. Run now! Hope is 
in speed!’ 

Shadowfax tossed his head and cried aloud, as if a trumpet 
had summoned him to battle. Then he sprang forward. Fire 
flew from his feet; night rushed over him. 



784 


THE TWO TOWERS 


As he fell slowly into sleep, Pippin had a strange feeling: 
he and Gandalf were still as stone, seated upon the statue of 
a running horse, while the world rolled away beneath his feet 
with a great noise of wind. 



BOOK FOUR 

