

THE LAST STAGE 


It was on May the First that the two came back at last to the brink of the valley of Rivendell, where 
stood the Last (or the First) Homely House. Again it was evening, their ponies were tired, especially 
the one that carried the baggage; and they all felt in need of rest. As they rode down the steep path, 
Bilbo heard the elves still singing in the trees, as if they had not stopped since he left; and as soon as 
the riders came down into the lower glades of the wood they burst into a song of much the same kind 
as before. This is something like it: 


The dragon is withered, 

His bones are now crumbled; 
His armour is shivered, 

His splendour is humbled! 
Though sword shall be rusted, 
And throne and crown perish 
With strength that men trusted 
And wealth that they cherish, 
Here grass is still growing, 
And leaves are yet swinging, 
The white water flowing, 

And elves are yet singing 

Come! Tra-la-la-lally! 

Come back to the valley! 


The stars are far brighter 
Than gems without measure, 
The moon is far whiter 
Than silver in treasure; 

The fire is more shining 
On hearth in the gloaming 
Than gold won by mining, 

So why go a-roaming? 

O! Tra-la-la-lally 

Come back to the Valley. 


O! Where are you going, 
So late in returning? 


The river is flowing, 

The stars are all burning! 
O! Whither so laden, 

So sad and so dreary? 

Here elf and elf-maiden 
Now welcome the weary 
With Tra-la-la-lally 
Come back to the Valley, 
Tra-la-la-lally 
Fa-la-la-lally 
Fa-la! 


Then the elves of the valley came out and greeted them and led them across the water to the house 
of Elrond. There a warm welcome was made them, and there were many eager ears that evening to 
hear the tale of their adventures. Gandalf it was who spoke, for Bilbo was fallen quiet and drowsy. 
Most of the tale he knew, for he had been in it, and had himself told much of it to the wizard on their 
homeward way or in the house of Beorn; but every now and again he would open one eye, and listen, 
when a part of the story which he did not yet know came in. 

It was in this way that he learned where Gandalf had been to; for he overheard the words of the 
wizard to Elrond. It appeared that Gandalf had been to a great council of the white wizards, masters of 
lore and good magic; and that they had at last driven the Necromancer from his dark hold in the south 
of Mirkwood. 

“Ere long now,” Gandalf was saying, “the Forest will grow somewhat more wholesome. The North 
will be freed from that horror for many long years, I hope. Yet I wish he were banished from the 
world!” 

“It would be well indeed,” said Elrond; “but I fear that will not come about in this age of the world, 
or for many after.” 

When the tale of their journeyings was told, there were other tales, and yet more tales, tales of long 
ago, and tales of new things, and tales of no time at all, till Bilbo’s head fell forward on his chest, and 
he snored comfortably in a corner. 

He woke to find himself in a white bed, and the moon shining through an open window. Below it 
many elves were singing loud and clear on the banks of the stream. 


Sing all ye joyful, now sing all together! 

The wind’s in the tree-top, the wind’s in the heather; 
The stars are in blossom, the moon is in flower, 

And bright are the windows of Night in her tower. 


Dance all ye joyful, now dance all together! 
Soft is the grass, and let foot be like feather! 
The river is silver, the shadows are fleeting; 
Merry is May-time, and merry our meeting. 



Sing we now softly, and dreams let us weave him! 

Wind him in slumber and there let us leave him! 

The wanderer sleepeth. Now soft be his pillow! Lullaby! 
Lullaby! Alder and Willow! 


Sigh no more Pine, till the wind of the morn! 
Fall Moon! Dark be the land! 

Hush! Hush! Oak, Ash, and Thorn! 
Hushed be all water, till dawn is at hand! 


“Well, Merry People!” said Bilbo looking out. “What time by the moon is this? Your lullaby would 
waken a drunken goblin! Yet I thank you.” 

“And your snores would waken a stone dragon — yet we thank you,” they answered with laughter. 

“It is drawing towards dawn, and you have slept now since the night’s beginning. Tomorrow, perhaps, 
you will be cured of weariness.” 

“A little sleep does a great cure in the house of Elrond,” said he; “but I will take all the cure I can 
get. A second good night, fair friends!” And with that he went back to bed and slept till late morning. 

Weariness fell from him soon in that house, and he had many a merry jest and dance, early and 
late, with the elves of the valley. Yet even that place could not long delay him now, and he thought 
always of his own home. After a week, therefore, he said farewell to Elrond, and giving him such 
small gifts as he would accept, he rode away with Gandalf . 

Even as they left the valley the sky darkened in the West before them, and wind and rain came up 
to meet them. 

“Merry is May-time!” said Bilbo, as the rain beat into his face. “But our back is to legends and we 
are coming home. I suppose this is the first taste of it.” 

“There is a long road yet,” said Gandalf. 

“But it is the last road,” said Bilbo. 

They came to the river that marked the very edge of the borderland of the Wild, and to the ford 
beneath the steep bank, which you may remember. The water was swollen both with the melting of the 
snows at the approach of summer, and with the daylong rain; but they crossed with some difficulty, 
and pressed forward, as evening fell, on the last stage of their journey. 

This was much as it had been before, except that the company was smaller, and more silent; also 
this time there were no trolls. At each point on the road Bilbo recalled the happenings and the words 
of a year ago — it seemed to him more like ten — so that, of course, he quickly noted the place where 
the pony had fallen in the river, and they had turned aside for their nasty adventure with Tom and Bert 
and Bill. 

Not far from the road they found the gold of the trolls, which they had buried, still hidden and 
untouched. “I have enough to last me my time,” said Bilbo, when they had dug it up. “You had better 
take this, Gandalf. I daresay you can find a use for it.” 

“Indeed I can!” said the wizard. “But share and share alike! You may find you have more needs 
than you expect.” 

So they put the gold in bags and slung them on the ponies, who were not at all pleased about it. 
After that their going was slower, for most of the time they walked. But the land was green and there 
was much grass through which the hobbit strolled along contentedly. He mopped his face with a red 



silk handkerchief — no! not a single one of his own had survived, he had borrowed this one from 
Elrond — for now June had brought summer, and the weather was bright and hot again. 

As all things come to an end, even this story, a day came at last when they were in sight of the 
country where Bilbo had been born and bred, where the shapes of the land and of the trees were as well 
known to him as his hands and toes. Coming to a rise he could see his own Hill in the distance, and he 
stopped suddenly and said: 


Roads go ever ever on, 

Over rock and under tree, 

By caves where never sun has shone, 

By streams that never find the sea; 
Over snow by winter sown, 

And through the merry flowers of June, 
Over grass and over stone, 

And under mountains in the moon. 


Roads go ever ever on 

Under cloud and under star, 

Yet feet that wandering have gone 
Turn at last to home afar. 

Eyes that fire and sword have seen 
And horror in the halls of stone 
Look at last on meadows green 

And trees and hills they long have known. 


Gandalf looked at him. “My dear Bilbo!” he said. “Something is the matter with you! You are not 
the hobbit that you were.” 

And so they crossed the bridge and passed the mill by the river and came right back to Bilbo’s own 
door. 

“Bless me! What’s going on?” he cried. There was a great commotion, and people of all sorts, 
respectable and unrespectable, were thick round the door, and many were going in and out — not even 
wiping their feet on the mat, as Bilbo noticed with annoyance. 

If he was surprised, they were more surprised still. He had arrived back in the middle of an 
auction! There was a large notice in black and red hung on the gate, stating that on June the Twenty- 
second Messrs Grubb, Grubb, and Burrowes would sell by auction the effects of the late Bilbo Baggins 
Esquire, of Bag-End, Underhill, Hobbiton. Sale to commence at ten o’clock sharp. It was now nearly 
lunchtime, and most of the things had already been sold, for various prices from next to nothing to old 
songs (as is not unusual at auctions). Bilbo’s cousins the Sackville-Bagginses were, in fact, busy 
measuring his rooms to see if their own furniture would fit. In short Bilbo was “Presumed Dead”, and 
not everybody that said so was sorry to find the presumption wrong. 

The return of Mr. Bilbo Baggins created quite a disturbance, both under the Hill and over the Hill, 
and across the Water; it was a great deal more than a nine days’ wonder. The legal bother, indeed, 
lasted for years. It was quite a long time before Mr. Baggins was in fact admitted to be alive again. 



The people who had got specially good bargains at the Sale took a deal of convincing; and in the end 
to save time Bilbo had to buy back quite a lot of his own furniture. Many of his silver spoons 
mysteriously disappeared and were never accounted for. Personally he suspected the Sackville- 
Bagginses. On their side they never admitted that the returned Baggins was genuine, and they were not 
on friendly terms with Bilbo ever after. They really had wanted to live in his nice hobbit-hole so very 
much. 

Indeed Bilbo found he had lost more than spoons — he had lost his reputation. It is true that for ever 
after he remained an elf-friend, and had the honour of dwarves, wizards, and all such folk as ever 
passed that way; but he was no longer quite respectable. He was in fact held by all the hobbits of the 
neighbourhood to be 'queer 5 — except by his nephews and nieces on the Took side, but even they were 
not encouraged in their friendship by their elders. 

I am sorry to say he did not mind. He was quite content; and the sound of the kettle on his hearth 
was ever after more musical than it had been even in the quiet days before the Unexpected Party. His 
sword he hung over the mantelpiece. His coat of mail was arranged on a stand in the hall (until he lent 
it to a Museum). His gold and silver was largely spent in presents, both useful and extravagant — 
which to a certain extent accounts for the affection of his nephews and his nieces. His magic ring he 
kept a great secret, for he chiefly used it when unpleasant callers came. 

He took to writing poetry and visiting the elves; and though many shook their heads and touched 
their foreheads and said “Poor old Baggins!” and though few believed any of his tales, he remained 
very happy to the end of his days, and those were extraordinarily long. 


One autumn evening some years afterwards Bilbo was sitting in his study writing his memoirs — he 
thought of calling them “There and Back Again, a Hobbit’s Holiday” — when there was a ring at the 
door. It was Gandalf and a dwarf; and the dwarf was actually Balin. 

“Come in! Come in!” said Bilbo, and soon they were settled in chairs by the fire. If Balin noticed 
that Mr. Baggins’ waistcoat was more extensive (and had real gold buttons), Bilbo also noticed that 
Balin’ s beard was several inches longer, and his jewelled belt was of great magnificence. 

They fell to talking of their times together, of course, and Bilbo asked how things were going in the 
lands of the Mountain. It seemed they were going very well. Bard had rebuilt the town in Dale and 
men had gathered to him from the Lake and from South and West, and all the valley had become tilled 
again and rich, and the desolation was now filled with birds and blossoms in spring and fruit and 
feasting in autumn. And Lake-town was refounded and was more prosperous than ever, and much 
wealth went up and down the Running River; and there was friendship in those parts between elves 
and dwarves and men. 




people, but being of the kind that easily catches such disease he fell under the dragon-sickness, and 
took most of the gold and fled with it, and died of starvation in the Waste, deserted by his 
companions. 

“The new Master is of wiser kind,” said Balin, “and very popular, for, of course, he gets most of 
the credit for the present prosperity. They are making songs which say that in his day the rivers run 
with gold.” 

“Then the prophecies of the old songs have turned out to be true, after a fashion!” said Bilbo. 

“Of course!” said Gandalf. “And why should not they prove true? Surely you don’t disbelieve the 
prophecies, because you had a hand in bringing them about yourself? You don’t really suppose, do 
you, that all your adventures and escapes were managed by mere luck, just for your sole bene-fit? You 
are a very fine person, Mr. Baggins, and I am very fond of you; but you are only quite a little fellow in 
a wide world after all!” 

“Thank goodness!” said Bilbo laughing, and handed him the tobacco-jar. 







WORKS BY J.R.R. TOLKIEN 

The Hobbit 
Leaf by Niggle 
On Fairy-Stories 
Farmer Giles of Ham 
The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth 
The Lord of the Rings 
The Adventures of Tom Bombadil 
The Road Goes Ever On (with Donald Swann) 
Smith of Wootton Major 

WORKS PUBLISHED POSTHUMOUSLY 
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl and Sir Orfeo 
The Father Christmas Letters 
The Silmarillion 
Pictures by J.R.R. Tolkien 
Unfinished Tales 
The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien 
Finn and Hengest 
Mr Bliss 

The Monsters and the Critics &amp; Other Essays 
Roverandom 
The Children of Hurin 
The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrun 

THE HISTORY OF MIDDLE-EARTH - BY CHRISTOPHER TOLKIEN 

I The Book of Lost Tales, Part One 

II The Book of Lost Tales, Part Two 

III The Lays of Beleriand 
IV The Shaping of Middle-earth 
V The Lost Road and Other Writings 

VI The Return of the Shadow 

VII The Treason of Isengard 
VIII The War of the Ring 

IX Sauron Defeated 

X Morgoth’s Ring 
XI The War of the Jewels 

XII The Peoples of Middle-earth 


COPYRIGHT 


HarperCollins Publishers 
77-85 Fulham Palace Road, 

Hammersmith, London W6 8JB 
www.tolkien.co.uk 

135798642 

This new reset edition is based on the edition 
first published in 1995 

First published by HarperCollins Publishers 1991 
Fifth edition (reset) 1995 

First published in Great Britain by 
George Allen &amp; Unwin 1937 
Second edition 1951 
Third edition 1966 
Fourth edition 1978 

Copyright © The J. R. R. Tolkien Copyright Trust 
1937, 1951, 1966, 1978, 1995 

( 3 $) 

vy® and ‘Tolkien’®are registered trademarks of 
The J. R. R. Tolkien Estate Limited 

EPub Edition MARCH 2009 ISBN: 978-0-007-32260-2 

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the 
required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the 
text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, 
decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval 
system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter 
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books. 


m a HarperCollins e-books 
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER 


Australia 

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd. 

25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) 

Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au 

Canada 

HarperCollins Canada 
2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor 
Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca 

New Zealand 

HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited 
P.O. Box 1 Auckland, 

New Zealand 

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz 

United Kingdom 

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 

77-85 Fulham Palace Road 
London, W6 8JB, UK 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk 

United States 

HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 

10 East 53rd Street 

New York, NY 10022 

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com 


The reason for this use is given in The Lord of the Rings, III, 1136. 


Son of Azog. See ± 


THE 



HOBBIT 



J.R.R. TOLKIEN 
