2. Concerning Pipe-weed 



There is another astonishing thing about Hobbits of old that must be 
mentioned, an astonishing habit: they imbibed or inhaled, through pipes of 
clay or wood, the smoke of the burning leaves of a herb, which they called 
pipe-weed or leaf, a variety probably of Nicotiana. A great deal of mystery 
surrounds the origin of this peculiar custom, or 'art' as the Hobbits 
preferred to call it. All that could be discovered about it in antiquity was 
put together by Meriadoc Brandybuck (later Master of Buckland), and since he 
and the tobacco of the Southfarthing play a part in the history that 
follows, his remarks in the introduction to his Herblore of the Shire may be 
quoted. 

’This,' he says, 'is the one art that we can certainly claim to be our 
own invention. When Hobbits first began to smoke is not known, all the 
legends and family histories take it for granted; for ages folk in the Shire 
smoked various herbs, some fouler, some sweeter. But all accounts agree that 
Tobold Hornblower of Longbottom in the Southfarthing first grew the true 
pipe-weed in his gardens in the days of Isengrim the Second, about the year 
1070 of Shire-reckoning. The best home-grown still comes from that district, 
especially the varieties now known as Longbottom Leaf, Old Toby, and 
Southern Star. 

'How Old Toby came by the plant is not recorded, for to his dying day 
he would not tell. He knew much about herbs, but he was no traveller. It is 
said that in his youth he went often to Bree, though he certainly never went 
further from the Shire than that. It is thus quite possible that he learned 
of this plant in Bree, where now, at any rate, it grows well on the south 
slopes of the hill. The Bree-hobbits claim to have been the first actual 
smokers of the pipe-weed. They claim, of course, to have done everything 
before the people of the Shire, whom they refer to as "colonists"; but in 
this case their claim is, I think, likely to be true. And certainly it was 
from Bree that the art of smoking the genuine weed spread in the recent 
centuries among Dwarves and such other folk, Rangers, Wizards, or wanderers, 
as still passed to and fro through that ancient road-meeting. The home and 
centre of the an is thus to be found in the old inn of Bree, The Prancing 




Pony, that has been kept by the family of Butterbur from time beyond record. 

'All the same, observations that I have made on my own many journeys 
south have convinced me that the weed itself is not native to our parts of 
the world, but came northward from the lower Anduin, whither it was, I 
suspect, originally brought over Sea by the Men of Westernesse. It grows 
abundantly in Gondor, and there is richer and larger than in the North, 
where it is never found wild, and flourishes only in warm sheltered places 
like Longbottom. The Men of Gondor call it sweet galenas, and esteem it only 
for the fragrance of its flowers. From that land it must have been carried 
up the Greenway during the long centuries between the coming of Elendil and 
our own day. But even the D®nedain of Gondor allow us this credit: Hobbits 
first put it into pipes. Not even the Wizards first thought of that before 
we did. Though one Wizard that I knew took up the art long ago, and became 
as skilful in it as in all other things that he put his mind to.' 
