3. Of the Ordering of the Shire 



The Shire was divided into four quarters, the Farthings already 
referred to. North, South, East, and West; and these again each into a 
number of folklands, which still bore the names of some of the old leading 
families, although by the time of this history these names were no longer 
found only in their proper folklands. Nearly all Tooks still lived in the 
Tookland, but that was not true of many other families, such as the 
Bagginses or the Boffins. Outside the Farthings were the East and West 
Marches: the Buckland (see beginning of Chapter V, Book I); and the 
Westmarch added to the Shire in S.R. 1462. 

The Shire at this time had hardly any 'government'. Families for the 
most part managed their own affairs. Growing food and eating it occupied 
most of their time. In other matters they were, as a rule, generous and not 
greedy, but contented and moderate, so that estates, farms, workshops, and 
small trades tended to remain unchanged for generations. 

There remained, of course, the ancient tradition concerning the high 
king at Fornost, or Norbury as they called it, away north of the Shire. But 
there had been no king for nearly a thousand years, and even the ruins of 
Kings' Norbury were covered with grass. Yet the Hobbits still said of wild 
folk and wicked things (such as trolls) that they had not heard of the king. 

For they attributed to the king of old all their essential laws; and usually 
they kept the laws of free will, because they were The Rules (as they said), 
both ancient and just. 

It is true that the Took family had long been pre-eminent; for the 
office of Thain had passed to them (from the Oldbucks) some centuries 
before, and the chief Took had borne that title ever since. The Thain was 
the master of the Shire-moot, and captain of the Shire-muster and the 
Hobbitry-in-arms, but as muster and moot were only held in times of 
emergency, which no longer occurred, the Thainship had ceased to be more 
than a nominal dignity. The Took family was still, indeed, accorded a 
special respect, for it remained both numerous and exceedingly wealthy, and 
was liable to produce in every generation strong characters of peculiar 
habits and even adventurous temperament. The latter qualities, however, were 




now rather tolerated (in the rich) than generally approved. The custom 
endured, nonetheless, of referring to the head of the family as The Took, 
and of adding to his name, if required, a number: such as Isengrim the 
Second, for instance. 

The only real official in the Shire at this date was the Mayor of 
Michel Delving (or of the Shire), who was elected every seven years at the 
Free Fair on the White Downs at the Lithe, that is at Midsummer. As mayor 
almost his only duty was to preside at banquets, given on the 
Shire-holidays, which occurred at frequent intervals. But the offices of 
Postmaster and First Shirriff were attached to the mayoralty, so that he 
managed both the Messenger Service and the Watch. These were the only 
Shire-services, and the Messengers were the most numerous, and much the 
busier of the two. By no means all Hobbits were lettered, but those who were 
wrote constantly to all their friends (and a selection of their relations) 
who lived further off than an afternoon's walk. 

The Shirriffs was the name that the Hobbits gave to their police, or 
the nearest equivalent that they possessed. They had, of course, no uniforms 
(such things being quite unknown), only a feather in their caps; and they 
were in practice rather haywards than policemen, more concerned with the 
strayings of beasts than of people. There were in all the Shire only twelve 
of them, three in each Farthing, for Inside Work. A rather larger body, 
varying at need, was employed to 'beat the bounds’, and to see that 
Outsiders of any kind, great or small, did not make themselves a nuisance. 

At the time when this story begins the Bounders, as they were called, 
had been greatly increased. There were many reports and complaints of 
strange persons and creatures prowling about the borders, or over them: the 
first sign that all was not quite as it should be, and always had been 
except in tales and legends of long ago. Few heeded the sign, and not even 
Bilbo yet had any notion of what it portended. Sixty years had passed since 
he set out on his memorable journey, and he was old even for Hobbits, who 
reached a hundred as often as not; but much evidently still remained of the 
considerable wealth that he had brought back. How much or how little he 
revealed to no one, not even to Frodo his favourite 'nephew'. And he still 
kept secret the ring that he bad found. 