4. Of the Finding of the Ring 



As is told in The Hobbit , there came one day to Bilbo's door the great 
Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him: none other, indeed, 
than Thorin Oakenshield, descendant of kings, and his twelve companions in 
exile. With them he set out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning 
of April, it being then the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of great 
treasure, the dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the Mountain, beneath Erebor 
in Dale, far off in the East. The quest was successful, and the Dragon that 
guarded the hoard was destroyed. Yet, though before all was won the Battle 
of Five Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and many deeds of renown 
were done, the matter would scarcely have concerned later history, or earned 
more than a note in the long annals of the Third Age, but for an 'accident' 
by the way. The party was assailed by Ores in a high pass of the Misty 
Mountains as they went towards Wilderland; and so it happened that Bilbo was 
lost for a while in the black ore-mines deep under the mountains, and there, 
as he groped in vain in the dark, he put his hand on a ring, lying on the 
floor of a tunnel. Ele put it in his pocket. It seemed then like mere luck. 

Trying to find his way out. Bilbo went on down to the roots of the 
mountains, until he could go no further. At the bottom of the tunnel lay a 
cold lake far from the light, and on an island of rock in the water lived 
Gollum. He was a loathsome little creature: he paddled a small boat with his 
large flat feet, peering with pale luminous eyes and catching blind fish 
with his long fingers, and eating them raw. He ate any living thing, even 
ore, if he could catch it and strangle it without a struggle. He possessed a 
secret treasure that had come to him long ages ago, when he still lived in 
the light: a ring of gold that made its wearer invisible. It was the one 
thing he loved, his 'precious', and he talked to it, even when it was not 
with him. For he kept it hidden safe in a hole on his island, except when he 
was hunting or spying on the ores of the mines. 

Maybe he would have attacked Bilbo at once, if the ring had been on him 
when they met; but it was not, and the hobbit held in his hand an Elvish 
knife, which served him as a sword. So to gain time Gollum challenged Bilbo 
to the Riddle-game, saying that if he asked a riddle which Bilbo could not 




guess, then he would kill him and eat him; but if Bilbo defeated him, then 
he would do as Bilbo wished: he would lead him to a way out of the tunnels. 

Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could neither go on nor 
back. Bilbo accepted the challenge; and they asked one another many riddles. 
In the end Bilbo won the game, more by luck (as it seemed) than by wits; for 
he was stumped at last for a riddle to ask, and cried out, as his hand came 
upon the ring he lad picked up and forgotten: What haw I got in my pocket? 
This Gollum failed to answer, though he demanded three guesses. 

The Authorities, it is true, differ whether this last question was a 
mere 'question' and not a 'riddle' according to the strict rules of the 
Game; but all agree that, after accepting it and trying to guess the answer, 
Gollum was bound by his promise. And Bilbo pressed him to keep his word; 
for 

the thought came to him that this slimy creature might prove false, even 
though such promises were held sacred, and of old all but the wickedest 
things feared to break them. But after ages alone in the dark Gollum's heart 
was black, and treachery was in it. He slipped away, and returned to the 
island, of which Bilbo knew nothing, not far off in the dark water. There, 
he thought, lay his ring. He was hungry now, and angry, and once his 
'precious' was with him he would not fear any weapon at all. 

But the ring was not on the island; he had lost it, it was gone. His 
screech sent a shiver down Bilbo's back, though he did not yet understand 
what had happened. But Gollum had at last leaped to a guess, too late. What 
has it got in its pocketses? he cried. The light in his eyes was like a 
green flame as he sped back to murder the hobbit and recover his 'precious'. 
Just in time Bilbo saw his peril, and he fled blindly up the passage away 
from the water; and once more he was saved by his luck. For just as he ran 
he put his hand in his pocket, and the ring slipped quietly on to his 
finger. So it was that Gollum passed him without seeing him, and went to 
guard the way out, lest the 'thief should escape. Warily Bilbo followed 
him, as he went along, cursing, and talking to himself about his 'precious'; 
from which talk at last even Bilbo guessed the truth, and hope came to him 
in the darkness: he himself had found the marvellous ring and a chance of 
escape from the ores and from Gollum. 

At length they came to a halt before an unseen opening that led to the 
lower gates of the mines, on the eastward side of the mountains. There 
Gollum crouched at bay, smelling and listening; and Bilbo was tempted to 




slay him with his sword. But pity stayed him, and though he kept the ring, 
in which his only hope lay, he would not use it to help him kill the 
wretched creature at a disadvantage. In the end, gathering his courage, he 
leaped over Gollum in the dark, and fled away down the passage, pursued by 
his enemy's cries of hate and despair: Thief thief! Baggins! We hates it 
for ever! 

Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo first told 
it to his companions. To them his account was that Gollum had promised to 
give him a present, if he won the game; but when Gollum went to fetch it 
from his island he found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which had been 
given to him long ago on his birthday. Bilbo guessed that this was the very 
ring that he had found, and as he had won the game, it was already his by 
right. But being in a tight place, he said nothing about it, and made Gollum 
show him the way out, as a reward instead of a present. This account Bilbo 
set down in his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered it himself, not 
even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently it still appeared in the 
original Red Book, as it did in several of the copies and abstracts. But 
many copies contain the true account (as an alternative), derived no doubt 
from notes by Frodo or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though they 
seem to have been unwilling to delete anything actually written by the old 
hobbit himself. 

Gandalf, however, disbelieved Bilbo's first story, as soon as he heard 
it, and he continued to be very curious about the ring. Eventually he got 
the true tale out of Bilbo after much questioning, which for a while 
strained their friendship; but the wizard seemed to think the truth 
important. Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought it important, 
and disturbing, to find that the good hobbit had not told the truth from the 
first: quite contrary to his habit. The idea of a 'present' was not mere 
hobbitlike invention, all the same. It was suggested to Bilbo, as he 
confessed, by Gollum's talk that he overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call 
the ring his 'birthday present', many times. That also Gandalf thought 
strange and suspicious; but he did not discover the truth in this point for 
many more years, as will be seen in this book. 

Of Bilbo's later adventures little more need be said here. With the 
help of the ring he escaped from the ore-guards at the gate and rejoined his 
companions. He used the ring many times on his quest, chiefly for the help 
of his friends; but he kept it secret from them as long as he could. After 




his return to his home he never spoke of it again to anyone, save Gandalf 
and Frodo; and no one else in the Shire knew of its existence, or so he 
believed. Only to Frodo did he show the account of his Journey that he was 
writing. 

His sword, Sting, Bilbo hung over his fireplace, and his coat of 
marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the Dragon -hoard, he lent to a 
museum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house in fact. But he kept in a drawer 
at Bag End the old cloak and hood that he had worn on his travels; and the 
ring, secured by a fine chain, remained in his pocket. 

He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in his fifty-second 
year (S.R. 1342), and nothing very notable occurred in the Shire until Mr. 
Baggins began the preparations for the celebration of his 
hundred-and-eleventh birthday (S.R. 1401). At this point this History 
begins. 




NOTE ON THE SHIRE RECORDS 



At the end of the Third Age the part played by the Hobbits in the great 
events that led to the inclusion of the Shire in the Reunited Kingdom 
awakened among them a more widespread interest in their own history; and 
many of their traditions, up to that time still mainly oral, were collected 
and Written down. The greater families were also concerned with events in 
the Kingdom at large, and many of their members studied its ancient 
histories and legends. By the end of the first century of the Fourth Age 
there were already to be found in the Shire several libraries that contained 
many historical books and records. 

The largest of these collections were probably at Undertowers, at Great 
Smials, and at Brandy Hall. This account of the end of the Third Age is 
drawn mainly from the Red Book of Westmarch. That most important source 
for 

the history of the War of the Ring was so called because it was long 
preserved at Undertowers, the home of the Fairbairns, Wardens of the 
Westmarch. 1 It was in origin Bilbo's private diary, which he took with him 
to Rivendell. Frodo brought it back to the Shire, together with many loose 
leaves of notes, and during S.R. 1420-1 he nearly filled its pages with his 
account of the War. But annexed to it and preserved with it, probably m a 
single red case, were the three large volumes, bound in red leather, that 
Bilbo gave to him as a parting gift. To these four volumes there was added 
in Westmarch a fifth containing commentaries, genealogies, and various other 
matter concerning the hobbit members of the Fellowship. 

The original Red Book has not been preserved, but many copies were 
made, especially of the first volume, for the use of the descendants of the 
children of Master Samwise. The most important copy, however, has a 
different history. It was kept at Great Smials, but it was written in 
Condor, probably at the request of the great-grandson of Peregrin, and 
completed in S.R. 1592 (F.A. 172). Its southern scribe appended this note: 
Findegil, King's Writer, finished this work in IV 172. It is an exact copy 
in all details of the Thain's Book m Minas Tirith. That book was a copy, 
made at the request of King Elessar, of the Red Book of the Periannath, and 




was brought to him by the Thain Peregrin when he retired to Gondor in IV 64. 

The Thain’s Book was thus the first copy made of the Red Book and 
contained much that was later omitted or lost. In Minas Tirith it received 
much annotation, and many corrections, especially of names, words, and 
quotations in the Elvish languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated 
version of those parts of The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie outside 
the account of the War. The full tale is stated to have been written by 
Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, some time after the passing of the 
King. But the chief importance of Findegil’s copy is that it alone contains 
the whole of Bilbo's ’Translations from the Elvish'. These three volumes 
were found to be a work of great skill and learning in which, between 1403 
and 1418, he had used all the sources available to him in Rivendell, both 
living and written. But since they were little used by Frodo, being almost 
entirely concerned with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here. 

Since Meriadoc and Peregrin became the heads of their great families, 
and at the same time kept up their connexions with Rohan and Gondor, the 
libraries at Bucklebury and Tuckborough contained much that did not appear 
in the Red Book. In Brandy Hall there were many works dealing with Eriador 
and the history of Rohan. Some of these were composed or begun by 
Meriadoc 

himself, though in the Shire he was chiefly remembered for his Herhlore of 
the Shire, and for his Reckoning of Years m which he discussed the relation 
of the calendars of the Shire and Bree to those of Rivendell, Gondor, and 
Rohan. He also wrote a short treatise on Old Words and Names in the Shire, 
having special interest in discovering the kinship with the language of the 
Rohirrim of such 'shire-words' as mathom and old elements in place names. 

At Great Smials the books were of less interest to Shire-folk, though 
more important for larger history. None of them was written by Peregrin, but 
he and his successors collected many manuscripts written by scribes of 
Gondor: mainly copies or summaries of histories or legends relating to 
Elendil and his heirs. Only here in the Shire were to be found extensive 
materials for the history of N®menor and the arising of Sauron. It was 
probably at Great Smials that The Tale of Years 1 was put together, with the 
assistance of material collected by Meriadoc. Though the dates given are 
often conjectural, especially for the Second Age, they deserve attention. It 
is probable that Meriadoc obtained assistance and information from 
Rivendell, which he visited more than once. There, though Elrond had 




departed, his sons long remained, together with some of the High-elven folk. 
It is said that Celeborn went to dwell there after the departure of 
Galadriel; but there is no record of the day when at last he sought the Grey 
Havens, and with him went the last living memory of the Elder Days in 
Middle-earth. 