
\INU LIN DALE 


The Music of the Ainur 


There was Eru, the One, who in Arda is called lluvatar; 
and he made first the Ainur, the Holy Ones, that were the 
offspring of his thought, and they were with him before 
aught else was made. And he spoke to them, propounding 
to them themes of music; and they sang before him, and he 
was glad. But for a long while they sang only each alone, or 
but few together, while the rest hearkened; for each 
comprehended only that part of me mind of lluvatar from 
which he came, and in the understanding of their brethren 
they grew but slowly. Yet ever as they listened they came to 
deeper understanding, and increased in unison and 
harmony. 

And it came to pass that lluvatar called together all the 
Ainur and declared to them a mighty theme, unfolding to 
them things greater and more wonderful than he had yet 
revealed; and the glory of its beginning and the splendour 
of its end amazed the Ainur, so that they bowed before 
lluvatar and were silent. 

Then lluvatar said to them: 'Of the theme that I have 
declared to you, I will now that ye make in harmony together 
a Great Music. And since I have kindled you with the Flame 
Imperishable, ye shall show forth your powers in adorning 
this theme, each with his own thoughts and devices, if he 
will. But I win sit and hearken, and be glad that through you 
great beauty has been wakened into song.' 

Then the voices of the Ainur, like unto harps and lutes, 
and pipes and trumpets, and viols and organs, and like 
unto countless choirs singing with words, began to fashion 
the theme of lluvatar to a great music; and a sound arose of 
endless interchanging melodies woven in harmony that 
passed beyond hearing into the depths and into the 
heights, and the places of the dwelling of lluvatar were filled 
to overflowing, and the music and the echo of the music 
went out into the Void, and it was not void. Never since 
have the Ainur made any music like to this music, though it 
has been said that a greater still shall be made before 


lluvatar by the choirs of the Ainur and the Children of lluvatar 
after the end of days. Then the themes of lluvatar shall be 
played aright, and take Being in the moment of their 
utterance, for all shall then understand fully his intent in their 
part, and each shall know the comprehension of each, and 
lluvatar shall give to their thoughts the secret fire, being well 
pleased. 

But now lluvatar sat and hearkened, and for a great 
while it seemed good to him, for in the music there were no 
flaws. But as the theme progressed, it came into the heart 
of Melkor to interweave matters of his own imagining that 
were not in accord with the theme of lluvatar, for he sought 
therein to increase the power and glory of the part assigned 
to himself. To Melkor among the Ainur had been given the 
greatest gifts of power and knowledge, and he had a share 
in all the gifts of his brethren. He had gone often alone into 
the void places seeking the Imperishable Flame; for desire 
grew hot within him to bring into Being things of his own, 
and it seemed to him that lluvatar took no thought for the 
Void, and he was impatient of its emptiness. Yet he found 
not the Fire, for it is with lluvatar. But being alone he had 
begun to conceive thoughts of his own unlike those of his 
brethren. 

Some of these thoughts he now wove into his music, 
and straightway discord arose about him, and many that 
sang nigh him grew despondent, and their thought was 
disturbed and their music faltered; but some began to 
attune their music to his rather than to the thought which 
they had at first. Then the discord of Melkor spread ever 
wider, and the melodies which had been heard before 
foundered in a sea of turbulent sound. But lluvatar sat and 
hearkened until it seemed that about his throne there was a 
raging storm, as of dark waters that made war one upon 
another in an endless wrath that would not be assuaged. 

Then lluvatar arose, and the Ainur perceived that he 
smiled; and he lifted up his left hand, and a new theme 
began amid the storm, like and yet unlike to the former 
theme, and it gathered power and had new beauty. But the 
discord of Melkor rose in uproar and contended with it, and 
again there was a war of sound more violent than before, 
until many of the Ainur were dismayed and sang no longer, 
and Melkor had the mastery. Then again lluvatar arose, and 



the Ainur perceived that his countenance was stem; and he 
lifted up his right hand, and behold! a third theme grew 
amid the confusion, and it was unlike the others. For it 
seemed at first soft and sweet, a mere rippling of gentle 
sounds in delicate melodies; but it could not be quenched, 
and it took to itself power and profundity. And it seemed at 
last that there were two musics progressing at one time 
before the seat of lluvatar, and they were utterly at variance. 
The one was deep and wide and beautiful, but slow and 
blended with an immeasurable sorrow, from which its 
beauty chiefly came. The other had now achieved a unity of 
its own; but it was loud, and vain, and endlessly repeated; 
and it had little harmony, but rather a clamorous unison as 
of many trumpets braying upon a few notes. And it essayed 
to drown the other music by the violence of its voice, but it 
seemed that its most triumphant notes were taken by the 
other and woven into its own solemn pattern. 

In the midst of this strife, whereat the halls of lluvatar 
shook and a tremor ran out into the silences yet unmoved, 
lluvatar arose a third time, and his face was terrible to 
behold. Then he raised up both his hands, and in one 
chord, deeper than the Abyss, higher than the Firmament, 
piercing as the light of the eye of lluvatar, the Music ceased. 

Then lluvatar spoke, and he said: 'Mighty are the Ainur, 
and mightiest among them is Melkor; but that he may know, 
and all the Ainur, that I am lluvatar, those things that ye have 
sung, I will show them forth, that ye may see what ye have 
done. And thou, Melkor, shalt see that no theme may be 
played that hath not its uttermost source in me, nor can any 
alter the music in my despite. For he that attempteth this 
shall prove but mine instrument in the devising of things 
more wonderful, which he himself hath not imagined.' 

Then the Ainur were afraid, and they did not yet 
comprehend the words that were said to them; and Melkor 
was filled with shame, of which came secret anger. But 
lluvatar arose in splendour, and he went forth from the fair 
regions that he had made for the Ainur; and the Ainur 
followed him. 

But when they were come into the Void, lluvatar said to 
them: 'Behold your Music!' And he showed to them a vision, 
giving to them sight where before was only hearing; arid 



they saw a new World made visible before them, and it was 
globed amid the Void, and it was sustained therein, but 
was not of it. And as they looked and wondered this World 
began to unfold its history, and it seemed to them that it 
lived and grew. And when the Ainur had gazed for a while 
and were silent, lluvatar said again: 'Behold your Music! 
This is your minstrelsy; and each of you shall find contained 
herein, amid the design that I set before you, all those 
things which it may seem that he himself devised or added. 
And thou, Melkor, wilt discover all the secret thoughts of thy 
mind, and wilt perceive that they are but a part of the whole 
and tributary to its glory.' 

And many other things lluvatar spoke to the Ainur at 
that time, and because of their memory of his words, and 
the knowledge that each has of the music that he himself 
made, the Ainur know much of what was, and is, and is to 
come, and few things are unseen by them. Yet some things 
there are that they cannot see, neither alone nor taking 
counsel together; for to none but himself has lluvatar 
revealed all that he has in store, and in every age there 
come forth things that are new and have no foretelling, for 
they do not proceed from the past. And so it was that as 
this vision of the World was played before them, the Ainur 
saw that it contained things which they had not thought. And 
they saw with amazement the coming of the Children of 
lluvatar, and the habitation that was prepared for them; and 
they perceived that they themselves in the labour of their 
music had been busy with the preparation of this dwelling, 
and yet knew not that it had any purpose beyond its own 
beauty. For the Children of lluvatar were conceived by him 
alone; and they came with the third theme, and were not in 
the theme which lluvatar propounded at the beginning, and 
none of the Ainur had part in their making. Therefore when 
they beheld them, the more did they love them, being things 
other than themselves, strange and free, wherein they saw 
the mind of lluvatar reflected anew, and learned yet a little 
more of his wisdom, which otherwise had been hidden 
even from the Ainur. 

Now the Children of lluvatar are Elves and Men, the 
Firstborn and the Followers. And amid all the splendours of 
the World, its vast halls and spaces, and its wheeling fires, 
lluvatar chose a place for their habitation in the Deeps of 



Time and in the midst of the innumerable stars. And this 
habitation might seem a little thing to those who consider 
only the majesty of the Ainur, and not their terrible 
sharpness; as who should take the whole field of Arda for 
the foundation of a pillar and so raise it until the cone of its 
summit were more bitter than a needle; or who consider 
only the immeasurable vastness of the World, which still the 
Ainur are shaping, and not the minute precision to which 
they shape all things therein. But when the Ainur had beheld 
this habitation in a vision and had seen the Children of 
lluvatar arise therein, then many of the most mighty among 
them bent all their thought and their desire towards that 
place. And of these Melkor was the chief, even as he was 
in the beginning the greatest of the Ainur who took part in 
the Music. And he feigned, even to himself at first, that he 
desired to go thither and order all things for the good of the 
Children of lluvatar, controlling the turmoils of the heat and 
the cold that had come to pass through him. But he desired 
rather to subdue to his will both Elves and Men, envying the 
gifts with which lluvatar promised to endow them; and he 
wished himself to have subject and servants, and to be 
called Lord, and to be a master over other wills. 


But the other Ainur looked upon this habitation set 
within the vast spaces of the World, which the Elves call 
Arda, the Earth; and their hearts rejoiced in light, and their 
eyes beholding many colours were filled with gladness; but 
because of the roaring of the sea they felt a great unquiet. 
And they observed the winds and the air, and the matters of 
which Arda was made, of iron and stone and silver and 
gold and many substances: but of all these water they most 
greatly praised. And it is said by the Eldar that in water 
there lives yet the echo of the Music of the Ainur more than 
in any substance else that is in this Earth; and many of the 
Children of lluvatar hearken still unsated to the voices of the 
Sea, and yet know not for what they listen. 

Now to water had that Ainu whom the Elves can Ulmo 
turned his thought, and of all most deeply was he instructed 
by lluvatar in music. But of the airs and winds Manwe most 
had pondered, who is the noblest of the Ainur. Of the fabric 
of Earth had Aule thought, to whom lluvatar had given skin 
and knowledge scarce less than to Melkor; but the delight 


and pride of Aule is in the deed of making, and in the thing 
made, and neither in possession nor in his own mastery; 
wherefore he gives and hoards not, and is free from care, 
passing ever on to some new work. 

And lluvatar spoke to Ulmo, and said: 'Seest thou not 
how here in this little realm in the Deeps of Time Melkor 
hath made war upon thy province? He hath bethought him 
of bitter cold immoderate, and yet hath not destroyed the 
beauty of thy fountains, nor of my clear pools. Behold the 
snow, and the cunning work of frost! Melkor hath devised 
heats and fire without restraint, and hath not dried up thy 
desire nor utterly quelled the music of the sea. Behold 
rather the height and glory of the clouds, and the 
everchanging mists; and listen to the fall of rain upon the 
Earth! And in these clouds thou art drawn nearer to Manwe, 
thy friend, whom thou lovest.' 

Then Ulmo answered: Truly, Water is become now 
fairer than my heart imagined, neither had my secret 
thought conceived the snowflake, nor in all my music was 
contained the falling of the rain. I will seek Manwe, that he 
and I may make melodies for ever to my delight!' And 
Manwe and Ulmo have from the beginning been allied, and 
in all things have served most faithfully the purpose of 
lluvatar. 

But even as Ulmo spoke, and while the Ainur were yet 
gazing upon this vision, it was taken away and hidden from 
their sight; and it seemed to them that in that moment they 
perceived a new thing, Darkness, which they had not known 
before except in thought. But they had become enamoured 
of the beauty of the vision and engrossed in the unfolding of 
the World which came there to being, and their minds were 
filled with it; for the history was incomplete and the circles of 
time not full-wrought when the vision was taken away. And 
some have said that the vision ceased ere the fulfilment of 
the Dominion of Men and the fading of the Firstborn; 
wherefore, though the Music is over all, the Valar have not 
seen as with sight the Later Ages or the ending of the 
World. 

Then there was unrest among the Ainur; but lluvatar 
called to them, and said: 'I know the desire of your minds 
that what ye have seen should verily be, not only in your 



thought, but even as ye yourselves are, and yet other. 
Therefore I say: Ea! Let these things Be! And I will send 
forth into the Void the Flame Imperishable, and it shall be at 
the heart of the World, and the World shall Be; and those of 
you that will may go down into it. And suddenly the Ainur 
saw afar off a light, as it were a cloud with a living heart of 
flame; and they knew that this was no vision only, but that 
lluvatar had made a new thing: Ea, the World that Is. 

Thus it came to pass that of the Ainur some abode still 
with lluvatar beyond the confines of the World; but others, 
and among them many of the greatest and most fair, took 
the leave of lluvatar and descended into it. But this 
condition lluvatar made, or it is the necessity of their love, 
that their power should thenceforward be contained and 
bounded in the World, to be within it for ever, until it is 
complete, so that they are its life and it is theirs. And 
therefore they are named the Valar, the Powers of the 
World. 

But when the Valar entered into Ea they were at first 
astounded and at a loss, for it was as if naught was yet 
made which they had seen in vision, and all was but on 
point to begin and yet unshaped, and it was dark. For the 
Great Music had been but the growth and flowering of 
thought in the Tuneless Halls, and the Vision only a 
foreshowing; but now they had entered in at the beginning 
of Time, and the Valar perceived that the World had been 
but foreshadowed and foresung, and they must achieve it. 
So began their great labours in wastes unmeasured and 
unexplored, and in ages uncounted and forgotten, until in 
the Deeps of Time and in the midst of the vast halls of Ea 
there came to be that hour and that place where was made 
the habitation of the Children of lluvatar. And in this work the 
chief part was taken by Manwe and Aule and Ulmo; but 
Melkor too was there from the first, and he meddled in all 
that was done, turning it if he might to his own desires and 
purposes; and he kindled great fires. When therefore Earth 
was yet young and full of flame Melkor coveted it, and he 
said to the other Valar: This shall be my own kingdom; and 
I name it unto myself!' 

But Manwe was the brother of Melkor in the mind of 
lluvatar, and he was the chief instrument of the second 
theme that lluvatar had raised up against the discord of 



Melkor; and he called unto himself many spirits both greater 
and less, and they came down into the fields of Arda and 
aided Manwe, lest Melkor should hinder the fulfilment of 
their labour for ever, and Earth should wither ere it flowered. 
And Manwe said unto Melkor: This kingdom thou shalt not 
take for thine own, wrongfully, for many others have 
laboured here do less than thou.' And there was strife 
between Melkor and the other Valar; and for that time 
Melkor withdrew and departed to other regions and did 
there what he would; but he did not put the desire of the 
Kingdom of Arda from his heart. 

Now the Valar took to themselves shape and hue; and 
because they were drawn into the World by love of the 
Children of lluvatar, for whom they hoped, they took shape 
after that manner which they had beheld in the Vision of 
lluvatar, save only in majesty and splendour. Moreover their 
shape comes of their knowledge of the visible World, rather 
than of the World itself; and they need it not, save only as 
we use raiment, and yet we may be naked and suffer no 
loss of our being. Therefore the Valar may walk, if they will, 
unclad, and then even the Eldar cannot clearly perceive 
them, though they be present. But when they desire to 
clothe themselves the Valar take upon them forms some as 
of male and some as of female; for that difference of 
temper they had even from their beginning, and it is but 
bodied forth in the choice of each, not made by the choice, 
even as with us male and female may be shown by the 
raiment but is not made thereby. But the shapes wherein 
the Great Ones array themselves are not at all times like to 
the shapes of the kings and queens of the Children of 
lluvatar; for at times they may clothe themselves in their own 
thought, made visible in forms of majesty and dread. 

And the Valar drew unto them many companions, 
some less, some well nigh as great as themselves, and 
they laboured together in the ordering of the Earth and the 
curbing of its tumults. Then Melkor saw what was done, and 
that the Valar walked on Earth as powers visible, clad in the 
raiment of the World, and were lovely and glorious to see, 
and blissful, and that the Earth was becoming as a garden 
for their delight, for its turmoils were subdued. His envy 
grew then the greater within him; and he also took visible 
form, but because of his mood and the malice that burned 



in him that form was dark and terrible. And he descended 
upon Arda in power and majesty greater than any other of 
the Valar, as a mountain that wades in the sea and has its 
head above the clouds and is clad in ice and crowned with 
smoke and fire; and the light of the eyes of Melkor was like 
a flame that withers with heat and pierces with a deadly 
cold. 

Thus began the first battle of the Valar with Melkor for 
the dominion of Arda; and of those tumults the Elves know 
but little. For what has here been declared is come from the 
Valar themselves, with whom the Eldalie spoke in the land 
of Valinor, and by whom they were instructed; but little 
would the Valar ever tell of the wars before the coming of 
the Elves. Yet it is told among the Eldar that the Valar 
endeavoured ever, in despite of Melkor, to rule the Earth 
and to prepare it for the coming of the Firstborn; and they 
built lands and Melkor destroyed them; valleys they delved 
and Melkor raised them up; mountains they carved and 
Melkor threw them down; seas they hollowed and Melkor 
spilled them; and naught might have peace or come to 
lasting growth, for as surely as the Valar began a labour so 
would Melkor undo it or corrupt it. And yet their labour was 
not all in vain; and though nowhere and in no work was their 
will and purpose wholly fulfilled, and all things were in hue 
and shape other than the Valar had at first intended, slowly 
nonetheless the Earth was fashioned and made firm. And 
thus was the habitation of the Children of lluvatar 
established at the last in the Deeps of Time and amidst the 
innumerable stars. 
