
VALAQUENTA 


Account of the V alar and Maiar according to the lore 
of the Eldar 


In the beginning Eru, the One, who in the Elvish tongue 
is named lluvatar, made the Ainur of his thought; and they 
made a great Music before him. In this Music the World 
was begun; for lluvatar made visible the song of the Ainur, 
and they beheld it as a light in the darkness. And many 
among them became enamoured of its beauty, and of its 
history which they saw beginning and unfolding as in a 
vision. Therefore lluvatar gave to their vision Being, and set 
it amid the Void, and the Secret Fire was sent to burn at the 
heart of the World; and it was called Ea. 

Then those of the Ainur who desired it arose and 
entered into the World at the beginning of Time; and it was 
their task to achieve it, and by their labours to fulfil the 
vision which they had seen. Long they laboured in the 
regions of Ea, which are vast beyond the thought of Elves 
and Men, until in the time appointed was made Arda, the 
Kingdom of Earth. Then they put on the raiment of Earth 
and descended into it, and dwelt therein. 

Of the Valar 

The Great among these spirits the Elves name the 
Valar, the Powers of Arda, and Men have often called them 
gods. The Lords of the Valar are seven; and the Valier, the 
Queens of the Valar, are seven also. These were their 
names in the Elvish tongue as it was spoken in Valinor, 
though they have other names in the speech of the Elves in 
Middle-earth, and their names among Men are manifold. 
The names of the Lords in due order are: Manwe, Ulmo, 
Aule, Orome, Mandos, Lorien, and Tulkas; and the names 
of the Queens are: Varda, Yavanna, Nienna, Este, Vaire, 
Vana, and Nessa. Melkor is counted no longer among the 
Valar, and his name is not spoken upon Earth. 



Manwe and Melkor were brethren in the thought of 
lluvatar. The mightiest of those Ainur who came into the 
World was in his beginning Melkor; but Manwe is dearest 
to lluvatar and understands most clearly his purposes. He 
was appointed to be, in the fullness of time, the first of all 
Kings: lord of the realm of Arda and ruler of all that dwell 
therein. In Arda his delight is in the winds and the clouds, 
and in all the regions of the air, from the heights to the 
depths, from the utmost borders of the Veil of Arda to the 
breezes that blow in the grass. Sulimo he is surnamed, 
Lord of the Breath of Arda. All swift birds, strong of wing, he 
loves, and they come and go at his bidding. 

With Manwe dwells Varda, Lady of the Stars, who 
knows all the regions of Ea. Too great is her beauty to be 
declared in the words of Men or of Elves; for the light of 
lluvatar lives still in her face. In light is her power and her joy. 
Out of the deeps of Ea she came to the aid of Manwe; for 
Melkor she knew from before the making of the Music and 
rejected him, and he hated her, and feared her more than 
all others whom Eru made. Manwe and Varda are seldom 
parted, and they remain in Valinor. Their halls are above 
the everlasting snow, upon Oiolosse, the uttermost tower of 
Taniquetil, tallest of all the mountains upon Earth. When 
Manwe there ascends his throne and looks forth, if Varda is 
beside him, he sees further than all other eyes, through 
mist, and through darkness, and over the leagues of the 
sea. And if Manwe is with her, Varda hears more clearly 
than all other ears the sound of voices that cry from east to 
west, from the hills and the valleys, and from the dark 
places that Melkor has made upon Earth. Of all the Great 
Ones who dwell in this world the Elves hold Varda most in 
reverence and love. Elbereth they name her, and they call 
upon her name out of the shadows of Middle-earth, and 
uplift it in song at the rising of the stars. 

Ulmo is the Lord of Waters. He is alone. He dwells 
nowhere long, but moves as he will in all the deep waters 
about the Earth or under the Earth. He is next in might to 
Manwe, and before Valinor was made he was closest to 
him in friendship; but thereafter he went seldom to the 
councils of the Valar, unless great matters were in debate. 
For he kept all Arda in thought, and he has no need of any 
resting-place. Moreover he does not love to walk upon land, 



and will seldom clothe himself in a body after the manner of 
his peers. If the Children of Eru beheld him they were filled 
with a great dread; for the arising of the King of the Sea 
was terrible, as a mounting wave that strides to the land, 
with dark helm foam-crested and raiment of mail 
shimmering from silver down into shadows of green. The 
trumpets of Manwe are loud, but Ulmo's voice is deep as 
the deeps of the ocean which he only has seen. 

Nonetheless Ulmo loves both Elves and Men, and 
never abandoned them, not even when they lay under the 
wrath of the Valar. At times he win come unseen to the 
shores of Middle-earth, or pass far inland up firths of the 
sea, and there make music upon his great horns, the 
Ulumuri, that are wrought of white shell; and those to whom 
that music comes hear it ever after in their hearts, and 
longing for the sea never leaves them again. But mostly 
Ulmo speaks to those who dwell in Middle-earth with voices 
that are heard only as the music of water. For all seas, 
lakes, rivers, fountains and springs are in his government; 
so that the Elves say that the spirit of Ulmo runs in all the 
veins of the world. Thus news comes to Ulmo, even in the 
deeps, of all the needs and griefs of Arda, which otherwise 
would be hidden from Manwe. 

Aule has might little less than Ulmo. His lordship is 
over all the substances of which Arda is made. In the 
beginning he wrought much in fellowship with Manwe and 
Ulmo; and the fashioning of all lands was his labour. He is a 
smith and a master of all crafts, and he delights in works of 
skill, however small, as much as in the mighty building of 
old. His are the gems that lie deep in the Earth and the gold 
that is fair in the hand, no less than the walls of the 
mountains and the basins of the sea. The Noldor learned 
most of him, and he was ever their friend. Melkor was 
jealous of him, for Aule was most like himself in thought and 
in powers; and there was long strife between them, in which 
Melkor ever marred or undid the works of Aule, and Aule 
grew weary in repairing the tumults and disorders of 
Melkor. Both, also, desired to make things of their own that 
should be new and unthought of by others, and delighted in 
the praise of their skill. But Aule remained faithful to Eru 
and submitted all that he did to his will; and he did not envy 
the works of others, but sought and gave counsel. Whereas 



Melkor spent his spirit in envy and hate, until at last he could 
make nothing save in mockery of the thought of others, and 
all their works he destroyed if he could. 

The spouse of Aule is Yavanna, the Giver of Fruits. 
She is the lover of all things that grow in the earth, and all 
their countless forms she holds in her mind, from the trees 
like towers in forests long ago to the moss upon stones or 
the small and secret things in the mould. In reverence 
Yavanna is next to Varda among the Queens of the Valar. In 
the form of a woman she is tall, and robed in green; but at 
times she takes other shapes. Some there are who have 
seen her standing like a tree under heaven, crowned with 
the Sun; and from all its branches there spilled a golden 
dew upon the barren earth, and it grew green with corn; but 
the roots of the tree were in the waters of Ulmo, and the 
winds of Manwe spoke in its leaves. Kementari, Queen of 
the Earth, she is surnamed in the Eldarin tongue. 

The Feanturi, masters of spirits, are brethren, and they 
are called most often Mandos and Lorien. Yet these are 
rightly the names of the places of their dwelling, and their 
true names are Namo and Irmo. 

Namo the elder dwells in Mandos, which is westward 
in Valinor. He is the keeper of the Houses of the Dead, and 
the summoner of the spirits of the slain. He forgets nothing; 
and he knows all things that shall be, save only those that lie 
still in the freedom of lluvatar. He is the Doomsman of the 
Valar; but he pronounces his dooms and his Judgements 
only at the bidding of Manwe. Vaire the Weaver is his 
spouse, who weaves all things that have ever been in Time 
into her storied webs, and the halls of Mandos that ever 
widen as the ages pass are clothed with them. 

Irmo the younger is the master of visions and dreams. 
In Lorien are his gardens in the land of the Valar, and they 
are the fairest of all places in the world, filled with many 
spirits. Este the gentle, healer of hurts and of weariness, is 
his spouse. Grey is her raiment; and rest is her gift. She 
walks not by day, but sleeps upon an island in the tree- 
shadowed lake of Lorellin. From the fountains of Irmo and 
Este all those who dwell in Valinor draw refreshment; and 
often the Valar come themselves to Lorien and there find 
repose and easing of the burden of Arda. 

Mightier than Este is Nienna, sister of the Feanturi; she 



dwells alone. She is acquainted with grief, and mourns for 
every wound that Arda has suffered in the marring of 
Melkor. So great was her sorrow, as the Music unfolded, 
that her song turned to lamentation long before its end, and 
the sound of mourning was woven into the themes of the 
World before it began. But she does not weep for herself; 
and those who hearken to her learn pity, and endurance in 
hope. Her halls are west of West, upon the borders of the 
world; and she comes seldom to the city of Valimar where 
all is glad. She goes rather to the halls of Mandos, which 
are near to her own; and all those who wait in Mandos cry 
to her, for she brings strength to the spirit and turns sorrow 
to wisdom. The windows of her house look outward from 
the walls of the world. 

Greatest in strength and deeds of prowess is Tulkas, 
who is surnamed Astaldo, the Valiant. He came last to 
Arda, to aid the Valar in the first battles with Melkor. He 
delights in wrestling and in contests of strength; and he 
rides no steed, for he can outrun all things that go on feet, 
and he is tireless. His hair and beard are golden, and his 
flesh ruddy; his weapons are his hands. He has little heed 
for either the past or the future, and is of no avail as a 
counsellor, but is a hardy friend. His spouse is Nessa, the 
sister of Orome, and she also is lithe and fleetfooted. Deer 
she loves, and they follow her train whenever she goes in 
the wild; but she can outrun them, swift as an arrow with the 
wind in her hair. In dancing she delights, and she dances in 
Valimar on lawns of never-fading green. 

Orome is a mighty lord. If he is less strong than Tulkas, 
he is more dreadful in anger; whereas Tulkas laughs ever, 
in sport or in war, and even in the face of Melkor he laughed 
in battles before the Elves were born. Orome loved the 
lands of Middle-earth, and he left them unwillingly and came 
last to Valinor; and often of old he passed back east over 
the mountains and returned with his host to the hills and the 
plains. He is a hunter of monsters and fell beasts, and he 
delights in horses and in hounds; and all trees he loves, for 
which reason he is called Aldaron, and by the Sindar 
Tauron, the Lord of Forests. Nahar is the name of his 
horse, white in the sun, and shining silver at night. The 
Valaroma is the name of his great horn, the sound of which 
is like the upgoing of the Sun in scarlet, or the sheer 



lightning cleaving the clouds. Above all the horns of his host 
it was heard in the woods that Yavanna brought forth in 
Valinor; for there Orome would train his folk and his beasts 
for the pursuit of the evil creatures of Melkor. The spouse of 
Orome is Vana, the Ever-young; she is the younger sister of 
Yavanna. All flowers spring as she passes and open if she 
glances upon them; and all birds sing at her coming. 

These are the names of the Valar and the Valier, and 
here is told in brief their likenesses, such as the Eldar 
beheld them in Aman. But fair and noble as were the forms 
in which they were manifest to the Children of lluvatar, they 
were but a veil upon their beauty and their power. And if 
little is here said of all that the Eldar once knew, that is as 
nothing compared with their true being, which goes back 
into regions and ages far beyond our thought. Among them 
Nine were of chief power and reverence; but one is 
removed from their number, and Eight remain, the Aratar, 
the High Ones of Arda: Manwe and Varda, Ulmo, Yavanna 
and Aule, Mandos, Nienna, and Orome. Though Manwe is 
their King and holds their allegiance under Eru, in majesty 
they are peers, surpassing beyond compare all others, 
whether of the Valar and the Maiar, or of any other order 
that lluvatar has sent into Ea. 


Of the Maiar 

With the Valar came other spirits whose being also 
began before the World, of the same order as the Valar but 
of less degree. These are the Maiar, the people of the 
Valar, and their servants and helpers. Their number is not 
known to the Elves, and few have names in any of the 
tongues of the Children of lluvatar; for though it is otherwise 
in Aman, in Middle-earth the Maiar have seldom appeared 
in form visible to Elves and Men. 

Chief among the Maiar of Valinor whose names are 
remembered in the histories of the Elder Days are llmare, 
the handmaid of Varda, and Eonwe, the banner-bearer and 
herald of Manwe, whose might in arms is surpassed by 
none in Arda. But of all the Maiar Osse and Uinen are best 
known to the Children of lluvatar. 



Osse is a vassal of Ulmo, and he is master of the seas 
that wash the shores of Middle-earth. He does not go in the 
deeps, but loves the coasts and the isles, and rejoices in 
the winds of Manwe; for in storm he delights, and laughs 
amid the roaring of the waves. His spouse is Uinen, the 
Lady of the Seas, whose hair lies spread through all waters 
under sky. All creatures she loves that live in the salt 
streams, and all weeds that grow there; to her mariners cry, 
for she can lay calm upon the waves, restraining the 
wildness of Osse. The Numenoreans lived long in her 
protection, and held her in reverence equal to the Valar. 

Melkor hated the Sea, for he could not subdue it. It is 
said that in the making of Arda he endeavoured to draw 
Osse to his allegiance, promising to him all the realm and 
power of Ulmo, if he would serve him. So it was that long 
ago there arose great tumults in the sea that wrought ruin to 
the lands. But Uinen, at the prayer of Aule, restrained Osse 
and brought him before Ulmo; and he was pardoned and 
returned to his allegiance, to which he has remained 
faithful. For the most part; for the delight in violence has 
never wholly departed from him, and at times he will rage in 
his wilfulness without any command from Ulmo his lord. 
Therefore those who dwell by the sea or go up in ships may 
love him, but they do not trust him. 

Melian was the name of a Maia who served both Vana 
and Este; she dwelt long in Lorien, tending the trees that 
flower in the gardens of Irmo, ere she came to Middle- 
earth. Nightingales sang about her wherever she went. 

Wisest of the Maiar was Olorin. He too dwelt in Lorien, 
but his ways took him often to the house of Nienna, and of 
her he learned pity and patience. 

Of Melian much is told in the Quenta Silmarillion. But 
of Olorin that tale does not speak; for though he loved the 
Elves, he walked among them unseen, or in form as one of 
them, and they did not know whence came the fair visions 
or the promptings of wisdom that he put into their hearts. In 
later days he was the friend of all the Children of lluvatar, 
and took pity on their sorrows; and those who listened to 
him awoke from despair and put away the imaginations of 
darkness. 



Of the Enemies 


Last of all is set the name of Melkor, He who arises in 
Might. But that name he has forfeited; and the Noldor, who 
among the Elves suffered most from his malice, will not 
utter it, and they name him Morgoth, the Dark Enemy of the 
World. Great might was given to him by lluvatar, and he was 
coeval with Manwe. In the powers and knowledge of all the 
other Valar he had part, but he turned them to evil 
purposes, and squandered his strength in violence and 
tyranny. For he coveted Arda and all that was in it, desiring 
the kingship of Manwe and dominion over the realms of his 
peers. 

From splendour he fell through arrogance to contempt 
for all things save himself, a spirit wasteful and pitiless. 
Understanding he turned to subtlety in perverting to his own 
will all that he would use, until he became a liar without 
shame. He began with the desire of Light, but when he 
could not possess it for himself alone, he descended 
through fire and wrath into a great burning, down into 
Darkness. And darkness he used most in his evil works 
upon Arda, and filled it with fear for all living things. 

Yet so great was the power of his uprising that in ages 
forgotten he contended with Manwe and all the Valar, and 
through long years in Arda held dominion over most of the 
lands of the Earth. But he was not alone. For of the Maiar 
many were drawn to his splendour in the days of his 
greatness, and remained in that allegiance down into his 
darkness; and others he corrupted afterwards to his service 
with lies and treacherous gifts. Dreadful among these 
spirits were the Valaraukar, the scourges of fire that in 
Middle-earth were called the Balrogs, demons of terror. 

Among those of his servants that have names the 
greatest was that spirit whom the Eldar called Sauron, or 
Gorthaur the Cruel. In his beginning he was of the Maiar of 
Aule, and he remained mighty in the lore of that people. In 
all the deeds of Melkor the Morgoth upon Arda, in his vast 
works and in the deceits of his cunning, Sauron had a part, 
and was only less evil than his master in that for long he 
served another and not himself. But in after years he rose 
like a shadow of Morgoth and a ghost of his malice, and 



walked behind him on the same ruinous path down into the 
Void. 

HERE ENDS THE VALAQUENTA 
