
Of Thingol and Melian 

Melian was a Maia, of the race of the Valar. She dwelt 
in the gardens of Lorien, and among all his people there 
were none more beautiful than Melian, nor more wise, nor 
more skilled in songs of enchantment. It is told that the 
Valar would leave their works, and the birds of Valinor their 
mirth, that the bells of Valmar were silent and the fountains 
ceased to flow, when at the mingling of the lights Melian 
sang in Lorien. Nightingales went always with her, and she 
taught them their song; and she loved the deep shadows of 
the great trees. She was akin before the World was made 
to Yavanna herself; and in that time when the Quendi awoke 
beside the waters of Cuivienen she departed from Valinor 
and came to the Hither Lands, and there she filled the 
silence of Middle-earth before the dawn with her voice and 
the voices of her birds. 

Now when their journey was near its end, as has been 
told, the people of the Teleri rested long in East Beleriand, 
beyond the River Gelion; and at that time many of the 
Noldor still lay to the westward, in those forests that were 
afterwards named Neldoreth and Region. Elwe, lord of the 
Teleri, went often through the great woods to seek out 
Finwe his friend in the dwellings of the Noldor; and it 
chanced on a time that he came alone to the starlit wood of 
Nan Elmoth, and there suddenly he heard the song of 
nightingales. Then an enchantment fell on him, and he 
stood still; and afar off beyond the voices of the lomelindi 
he heard the voice of Melian, and it filled all his heart with 
wonder and desire. He forgot then utterly all his people and 
all the purposes of his mind, and following the birds under 
the shadow of the trees he passed deep into Nan Elmoth 
and was lost. But he came at last to a glade open to the 
stars, and there Melian stood; and out of the darkness he 
looked at her, and the light of Aman was in her face. 

She spoke no word; but being filled with love Elwe 
came to her and took her hand, and straightway a spell was 
laid on him, so that they stood thus while long years were 
measured by the wheeling stars above them; and the trees 
of Nan Elmoth grew tall and dark before they spoke any 



word. 

Thus Elwe's folk who sought him found him not, and 
Olwe took the kingship of the Teleri and departed, as is told 
hereafter. Elwe Singollo came never again across the sea 
to Valinor so long as he lived, and Melian returned not 
thither while their realm together lasted; but of her there 
came among both Elves and Men a strain of the Ainur who 
were with lluvatar before Ea. In after days he became a 
king renowned, and his people were all the Eldar of 
Beleriand; the Sindar they were named, the Grey-elves, the 
Elves of the Twilight and King Greymantle was he, Elu 
Thingol in the tongue of that land. And Melian was his 
Queen, wiser than any child of Middle-earth; and their 
hidden halls were in Menegroth, the Thousand Caves, in 
Doriath. Great power Melian lent to Thingol, who was 
himself great among the Eldar; for he alone of all the Sindar 
had seen with his own eyes the Trees in the day of their 
flowering, and king though he was of Amanyar, he was not 
accounted among the Moriquendi, but with the Elves of the 
Light, mighty upon Middle-earth. And of the love of Thingol 
and Melian there came into the world the fairest of all the 
Children of lluvatar that was or shall ever be. 



