
Of Eldamar and the Princes of the 
Eldalie 

In time the hosts of the Vanyar and the Noldor came to 
the last western shores of the Hither Lands. In the north 
these shores, in the ancient days after the Battle of the 
Powers, bent ever westward, until in the northernmost parts 
of Arda only a narrow sea divided Aman, upon which 
Valinor was built, from the Hither Lands; but this narrow sea 
was filled with grinding ice, because of the violence of the 
frosts of Melkor. Therefore Orome did not lead the hosts of 
the Eldalie into the far north, but brought them to the fair 
lands about the River Sirion, that afterwards were named 
Beleriand; and from those shores whence first the Eldar 
looked in fear and wonder on the Sea there stretched an 
ocean, wide and dark and deep, between them and the 
Mountains of Aman. 

Now Ulmo, by the counsel of the Valar, came to the 
shores of Middle-earth and spoke with the Eldar who 
waited there, gazing on the dark waves; and because of his 
words and the music which he made for them on his horns 
of shell their fear of the sea was turned rather to desire. 
Therefore Ulmo uprooted an island which long had stood 
alone amid the sea, far from either shore, since the tumults 
of the fall of llluin; and with the aid of his servants he moved 
it, as it were a mighty ship, and anchored it in the Bay of 
Balar, into which Sirion poured his water. Then the Vanyar 
and the Noldor embarked upon that isle, and were drawn 
over the sea, and came at last to the long shores beneath 
the Mountains of Aman; and they entered Valinor and were 
welcomed to its bliss. But the eastern horn of the island, 
which was deep-grounded in the shoals off the mouths of 
Sirion, was broken asunder and remained behind and that, 
it is said, was the Isle of Balar, to which afterwards Osse 
often came. 

But the Teleri remained still in Middle-earth, for they 
dwelt in East Beleriand far from the sea, and they heard not 
the summons of Ulmo until too late; and many searched still 
for Elwe their lord, and without him they were unwilling to 
depart. But when they learned that Ingwe and Finwe and 



their peoples were gone, then many of the Teleri pressed 
on to the shores of Beleriand, and dwelt thereafter near the 
Mouths of Sirion, in longing for their friends that had 
departed; and they took Olwe, Elwe’s brother, to be their 
king. Long they remained by the coasts of the western sea, 
and Osse and Uinen came to them and befriended them; 
and Osse instructed them, sitting upon a rock near to the 
margin of the land, and of him they learned all manner of 
sea-lore and sea-music. Thus it came to be that the Teleri, 
who were from the beginning lovers of water, and the fairest 
singers of all the Elves, were after enamoured of the seas, 
and their songs were filled with the sound of waves upon 
the shore. 

When many years had passed, Ulmo hearkened to the 
prayers of the Noldor and of Finwe their king. Who grieved 
at their long sundering from the Teleri, and besought him to 
bring them to Aman, if they would come. And most of them 
proved now willing indeed; but great was the grief of Osse 
when Ulmo returned to the coasts of Beleriand, to bear 
them away to Valinor; for his care was for the seas of 
Middle-earth and the shores of the Hither Lands, and he 
was ill-pleased that the voices of the Teleri should be heard 
no more in his domain. Some he persuaded to remain; and 
those were the Falathrim, the Elves of the Falas, who in 
after days had dwellings at the havens of Brithombar and 
Eglarest, the first mariners in Middle-earth and the first 
makers of ships. Cirdan the Shipwright was their lord. 

The kinsfolk and friends of Elwe Singollo also 
remained in the Hither Lands, seeking him yet, though they 
would fain have departed to Valinor and the light of the 
Trees, if Ulmo and Olwe had been willing to tarry longer. 
But Olwe would be gone; and at last the main host of the 
Teleri embarked upon the isle, and Ulmo drew them far 
away. Then the friends of Elwe were left behind; and they 
called themselves Eglath, the Forsaken People. They dwelt 
in the woods and hills of Beleriand, rather than by the sea, 
which filled them with sorrow; but the desire of Aman was 
ever in their hearts. 

But when Elwe awoke from his long trance, he came 
forth from Nan Elmoth with Melian, and they dwelt thereafter 
in the woods in the midst of the land. Greatly though he had 
desired to see again the light of the Trees, in the face of 



Melian he beheld the light of Aman as in an unclouded 
mirror, and in that light he was content. His people gathered 
about him in joy, and they were amazed; for fair and noble 
as he had been, now he appeared as it were a lord of the 
Maiar, his hair as grey silver, tallest of all the Children of 
lluvatar; and a high doom was before him. 

Now Osse followed after the host of Olwe, and when 
they were come to the Bay of Eldamar (which is 
Elvenhome) he called to them; and they knew his voice, and 
begged Ulmo to stay their voyage. And Ulmo granted their 
request, and at his bidding Osse made fast the island and 
rooted it to the foundations of the sea. Ulmo did this the 
more readily for he understood the hearts of the Teleri, and 
in the council of the Valar he had spoken against the 
summons, thinking that it were better for the Quendi to 
remain in Middle-earth. The Valar were little pleased to 
learn what he had done; and Finwe grieved when the Teleri 
came not, and yet more when he learned that Elwe was 
forsaken, and knew that he should not see him again, 
unless it were in the halls of Mandos. But the island was not 
moved again, and stood there alone in the Bay of Eldamar; 
and it was called Tol Eressea, the Lonely Isle. There the 
Teleri abode as they wished under the stars of heaven, and 
yet within right of Aman and the deathless shore; and by 
that long sojourn apart in the Lonely Isle was caused the 
sundering of their speech from that of the Vanyar and the 
Noldor. 

To these the Valar had given a land and a dwelling- 
place. Even among the radiant flowers of the Tree-lit 
gardens of Valinor they longed still at times to see the 
stars; and therefore a gap was made in the great walls of 
the Pelori, and there in a deep valley that ran down to the 
sea the Eldar raised a high green hill: Tuna it was called. 
From the west the light of the Trees fell upon it, and its 
shadow lay ever eastward; and to the east it looked 
towards the Bay of Elvenhome, and the Lonely Isle, and the 
Shadowy Seas. Then through Calacirya, the Pass of Light, 
the radiance of the Blessed Realm streamed forth, kindling 
the dark waves to silver and gold, and it touched the Lonely 
Isle, and its western shore grew green and fair. There 
bloomed the first flowers that ever were east of the 




Mountains of Aman. 

Upon the crown of Tuna the city of the Elves was built, 
the white walls and terraces of Tirion; and the highest of the 
towers of that city was the Tower of Ingwe, Mindon 
Eldalieva, whose silver lamp shone far out into the mists of 
the sea. Few are the ships of mortal Men that have seen its 
slender beam. In Tirion upon Tuna the Vanyar and the 
Noldor dwelt long in fellowship. And since of all things in 
Valinor they loved most the White Tree, Yavanna made for 
them a tree like to a lesser image of Telperion, save that it 
did not give light of its own being; Galathilion it was named 
in the Sindarin tongue. This tree was planted in the courts 
beneath the Mindon and there flourished, and its seedlings 
were many in Eldamar. Of these one was afterwards 
planted in Tol Eressea, and it prospered there, and was 
named Celeborn; thence came in me fullness of time as is 
plspwhprp tnlrl Nimlnth thp White* Tree* nf Nnmpnnr 


Manwe and Varda loved most the Vanyar, the Fair 
Elves; but the Noldor were beloved ofAule, and he and his 
people came often among them. Great became their 


knowledge and their skill; yet even greater was their thirst 
for more knowledge, and in many things they soon 
surpassed their teachers. They were changeful in speech, 
for they had great love of words, and sought ever to find 
names more fit for all things that they knew or imagined. 
And it came to pass that the masons of the house of Finwe, 
quarrying in the hills after stone (for they delighted in the 
building of high towers), first discovered the earth-gems, 
and brought them forth in countless myriads; and they 
devised tools for the cutting and shaping of gems, and 
carved them in many forms. They hoarded them not, but 
gave them freely, and by their labour enriched all Valinor. 

The Noldor afterwards came back to Middle-earth, and 
this tale tells mostly of their deeds; therefore the names and 
kinship of their princes may here be told, in that form which 
these names later bore in the tongue of the Elves of 
Beleriand. 

Finwe was King of the Noldor. The sons of Finwe were 
Feanor, and Fingolfin, and Finarfin; but the mother of 
Feanor was Miriel Serinde, whereas the mother of Fingolfin 
and Finarfin was Indis of the Vanyar. Feanor was the 
mightiest in skill of word and of hand, more learned than his 
brothers; his spirit burned as a flame. Fingolfin was the 
strongest, the most steadfast, and the most valiant. Finarfin 
was the fairest, and the most wise of heart; and afterwards 
he was a friend of the sons of Olwe, lord of the Teleri, and 
had to wife Earwen, the swan-maiden of Alqualonde, 
Olwe's daughter. 

The seven sons of Feanor were Maedhros the tall; 
Maglor the mighty singer, whose voice was heard far over 
land and sea; Celegorm the fair, and Caranthir the dark; 
Curufin the crafty, who inherited most his father's skill of 
hand; and the youngest Amrod and Amras, who were twin 
brothers, alike in mood and face. In later days they were 
great hunters in the woods of Middle-earth; and a hunter 
also was Celegorm, who in Valinor was a friend of Orome, 
and often followed the Vala's horn. 

The sons of Fingolfin were Fingon, who was 
afterwards King of the Noldor in the north of the world, and 
Turgon, lord of Gondolin; their sister was Aredhel the White. 
She was younger in the years of the Eldar than her 
brothers; and when she was grown to full stature and beauty 



she was tall and strong, and loved much to ride and hunt in 
the forests. There she was often in the company of the sons 
of Feanor, her kin; but to none was her heart's love given. 
Ar-Feiniel she was called, the White Lady of the Noldor, for 
she was pale though her hair was dark, and she was never 
arrayed but in silver and white. 

The sons of Finarfin were Finrod the faithful (who was 
afterwards named Felagund, Lord of Caves), Orodreth, 
Angrod, and Aegnor; these four were as close in friendship 
with the sons of Fingolfin as though they were all brothers. 
A sister they had, Galadriel, most beautiful of all the house 
of Finwe; her hair was lit with gold as though it had caught 
in a mesh the radiance of Laurelin. 

Here must be told how the Teleri came at last to the 
land of Aman. Through a long age they dwelt in Tol 
Eressea; but slowly their hearts were changed, and were 
drawn towards the light that flowed out over the sea to the 
Lonely Isle. They were torn between the love of the music of 
the waves upon their shores, and the desire to see again 
their kindred and to look upon the splendour of Valinor; but 
in the end desire of the light was the stronger. Therefore 
Ulmo, submitting to the will of the Valar, sent to them Osse, 
their friend, and he though grieving taught them the craft of 
ship-building; and when their ships were built he brought 
them as his parting gift many strong-winged swans. Then 
the swans drew the white ships of the Teleri over the 
windless sea; and thus at last and latest they came to 
Aman and the shores of Eldamar. 

There they dwelt, and if they wished they could see the 
light of the Trees, and could tread the golden streets of 
Valmar and the crystal stairs of Tlrion upon Tuna, the green 
hill; but most of all they sailed in their swift ships on the 
waters of the Bay of Elvenhome, or walked in the waves 
upon the shore with their hair gleaming in the light beyond 
the hill. Many jewels the Noldor gave them, opals and 
diamonds and pale crystals, which they strewed upon the 
shores and scattered in the pools; marvellous were the 
beaches of Elende in those days. And many pearls they 
won for themselves from the sea, and their halls were of 
pearl, and of pearl were the mansions of Olwe at 
Alqualonde, the Haven of the Swans, lit with many lamps. 



For that was their city, and the haven of their ships; and 
those were made in the likeness of swans, with beaks of 
gold and eyes of gold and jet. The gate of that harbour was 
an arch of living rock sea-carved; and it lay upon the 
confines of Eldamar, north of the Calacirya, where the light 
of the stars was bright and clear. 

As the ages passed the Vanyar grew to love the land 
of the Valar and the full light of the Trees, and they forsook 
the city of Tirion upon Tuna, and dwelt thereafter upon the 
mountain of Manwe, or about the plains and woods of 
Valinor, and became sundered from the Noldor. But the 
memory of Middle-earth under the stars remained in the 
hearts of the Noldor, and they abode in the Calacirya, and 
in the hills and valleys within sound of the western sea; and 
though many of them went often about the land of the Valar, 
making far journeys in search of the secrets of land and 
water and all living things, yet the peoples of Tuna and 
Alqualonde drew together in those days. Finwe was king in 
Tirion and Olwe in Alqualonde; but Ingwe was ever held the 
High King of all the Elves. He abode thereafter at the feet of 
Manwe upon Taniquetil. 




Feanor and his sons abode seldom in one place for 
long, but travelled far and wide upon the confines of Valinor, 
going even to the borders of the Dark and the cold shores 
of the Outer Sea, seeking the unknown. Often they were 
guests in the halls of Aule; but Celegorm went rather to the 
house of Orome, and there he got great knowledge of birds 
and beasts, and all their tongues he knew. For all living 
things that are or have been in the Kingdom of Arda, save 
only the fell and evil creatures of Melkor, lived then in the 
land of Aman; and there also were many other creatures 
that have not been seen upon Middle-earth, and perhaps 
never now shall be, since the fashion of the world was 
changed. 


