
Of the Voyage of Earendil andmthe War 
of Wrath 

Bright Earendil was then lord of the people that dwelt 
nigh to Sirion's mouths; and he took to wife Elwing the fair, 
and she bore to him Elrond and Elros, who are called the 
Half-elven. Yet Earendil could not rest, and his voyages 
about the shores of the Hither Lands eased not his unquiet. 
Two purposes grew in his heart, blended as one in longing 
for the wide Sea: he sought to sail thereon, seeking after 
Tuor and Idril who returned not; and he thought to find 
perhaps the last shore, and bring ere he died the message 
of Elves and Men to the Valar in the West, that should move 
their hearts to pity for the sorrows of Middle-earth. 

Now Earendil became fast in friendship with Cirdan 
the Shipwright, who dwelt on the Isle of Balar with those of 
his people who escaped from the sack of the Havens of 
Brithombar and Eglarest. With the aid of Cirdan Earendil 
built Vingilot, the Foam-flower, fairest of the ships of song; 
golden were its oars and white its timbers, hewn in the 
birchwoods of Nimbrethil, and its sails were as the argent 
moon. In the Lay of Earendil is many a thing sung of his 
adventures in the deep and in lands untrodden, and in many 
seas and in many isles; but Elwing was not with him, and 
she sat in sorrow by the mouths of Sirion. 

Earendil found not Tuor nor Idril, nor came he ever on 
that journey to the shores of Valinor, defeated by shadows 
and enchantment, driven by repelling winds, until in longing 
for Elwing he turned homeward towards the coast of 
Beleriand. And his heart bade him haste, for a sudden fear 
had fallen on him out of dreams; and the winds that before 
he had striven with might not now bear him back as swift as 
his desire. 

Now when first the tidings came to Maedhros that 
Elwing yet lived, and dwelt in possession of the Silmaril by 
the mouths of Sirion, he repenting of the deeds in Doriath 
withheld his hand. But in time the knowledge of their oath 
unfulfilled returned to torment him and his brothers, and 
gathering from their wandering hunting-paths they sent 
messages to the Havens of friendship and yet of stem 



demand. Then Elwing and the people of Sirion would not 
yield the jewel which Beren had won and Luthien had worn, 
and for which Dior the fair was slain; and least of all while 
Earendil their lord was on the sea, for it seemed to them 
that in the Silmaril lay the healing and the blessing that had 
come upon their houses and their ships. And so there 
came to pass the last and cruellest of the slayings of Elf by 
Elf; and that was the third of the great wrongs achieved by 
the accursed oath. 

For the sons of Feanor that yet lived came down 
suddenly upon the exiles of Gondolin and the remnant of 
Doriath, and destroyed them. In that battle some of their 
people stood aside, and some few rebelled and were slain 
upon the other part aiding Elwing against their own lords 
(for such was the sorrow and confusion in the hearts of the 
Eldar in those days); but Maedhros and Maglor won the 
day, though they alone remained thereafter of the sons of 
Feanor, for both Amrod and Amras were slain. Too late the 
ships of Cirdan and Gil-galad the High King came hasting 
to the aid of the Elves of Sirion; and Elwing was gone, and 
her sons. Then such few of that people as did not perish in 
the assault joined themselves to Gil-galad, and went with 
him to Balar; and they told that Elros and Elrond were taken 
captive, but Elwing with the Silmaril upon her breast had 
cast herself into the sea. 

Thus Maedhros and Maglor gained not the jewel; but it 
was not lost. For Ulmo bore up Elwing out of the waves, 
and he gave her the likeness of a great white bird, and 
upon her breast there shone as a star the Silmaril, as she 
flew over the water to seek Earendil her beloved. On a time 
of night Earendil at the helm of his ship saw her come 
towards him, as a white cloud exceeding swift beneath the 
moon, as a star over the sea moving in strange course, a 
pale flame on wings of storm. And it is sung that she fell 
from the air upon the timbers of Vingilot, in a swoon, nigh 
unto death for the urgency of her speed, and Earendil took 
her to his bosom; but in the morning with marvelling eyes he 
beheld his wife in her own form beside him with her hair 
upon his face, and she slept. 

Great was the sorrow of Earendil and Elwing for the 
ruin of the havens of Sirion, and the captivity of their sons, 
and they feared that they would be slain; but it was not so. 



For Maglor took pity upon Elros and Elrond, and he 
cherished them, and love grew after between them, as little 
might be thought; but Maglor's heart was sick and weary 
with the burden of the dreadful oath. 

Yet Earendil saw now no hope left in the lands of 
Middle-earth, and he turned again in despair and came not 
home, but sought back once more to Valinor with Elwing at 
his side. He stood now most often at the prow of Vingilot, 
and the Silmaril was bound upon his brow; and ever its light 
grew greater as they drew into the West. And the wise have 
said that it was by reason of the power of that holy jewel 
that they came in time to waters that no vessels save those 
of the Teleri had known; and they came to the Enchanted 
Isles and escaped their enchantment; and they came into 
the Shadowy Seas and passed their shadows, and they 
looked upon Tol Eressea the Lonely Isle, but tarried not; 
and at the last they cast anchor in the Bay of Eldamar, and 
the Teleri saw the coming of that ship out of the East and 
they were amazed, gazing from afar upon the light of the 
Silmaril, and it was very great. Then Earendil, first of living 
Men, landed on the immortal shores; and he spoke there to 
Elwing and to those that were with him, and they were three 
mariners who had sailed all the seas besides him: 
Falathar, Erellont, and Aerandir were their names. And 
Earendil said to them: 'Here none but myself shall set foot, 
lest you fall under the wrath of the Valar. But that peril I will 
take on myself alone, for the sake of the Two Kindreds.' 

But Elwing answered: 'Then would our paths be 
sundered for ever; but all thy perils I will take on myself 
also.' And she leaped into the white foam and ran towards 
him; but Earendil was sorrowful, for he feared the anger of 
the Lords of the West upon any of Middle-earth that should 
dare to pass the leaguer of Aman. And there they bade 
farewell to the companions of their voyage, and were taken 
from them for ever. 

Then Earendil said to Elwing: 'Await me here; for one 
only may bring the message that it is my fate to bear.' And 
he went up alone into the land, and came into the Calacirya, 
and it seemed to him empty and silent; for even as Morgoth 
and Ungoliant came in ages past, so now Earendil had 
come at a time of festival, and wellnigh all the Elvenfolk 
were gone to Valimar, or were gathered in the halls of 



Manwe upon Taniquetil, and few were left to keep watch 
upon the walls of Tirion. 

But some there were who saw him from afar, and the 
great light that he bore; and they went in haste to Valimar. 
But Earendil climbed the green hill of Tuna and found it 
bare; and he entered into the streets of Tirion, and they 
were empty; and his heart was heavy, for he feared that 
some evil had come even to the Blessed Realm. He 
walked in the deserted ways of Tirion, and the dust upon 
his raiment and his shoes was a dust of diamonds, and he 
shone and glistened as he climbed the long white stairs. 
And he called aloud in many tongues, both of Elves and 
Men, but there were none to answer him. Therefore he 
turned back at last towards the sea; but even as he took the 
shoreward road one stood upon the hill and called to him in 
a great voice, crying: 

'Hail Earendil, of mariners most renowned, the looked 
for that cometh at unawares, the longed for that cometh 
beyond hope! Hail Earendil, bearer of light before the Sun 
and Moon! Splendour of the Children of Earth, star in the 
darkness, jewel in the sunset, radiant in the morning!' 

That voice was the voice of Eonwe, herald of Manwe, 
and he came from Valimar, and summoned Earendil to 
come before the Powers of Arda. And Earendil went into 
Valinor and to the halls of Valimar, and never again set foot 
upon the lands of Men. Then the Valar took counsel 
together, and they summoned Ulmo from the deeps of the 
sea; and Earendil stood before their faces, and delivered 
the errand of the Two Kindreds. Pardon he asked for the 
Noldor and pity for their great sorrows, and mercy upon 
Men and Elves and succour in their need. And his prayer 
was granted. 

It is told among the Elves that after Earendil had 
departed, seeking Elwing his wife, Mandos spoke 
concerning his fate; and he said: 'Shall mortal Man step 
living upon the undying lands, and yet live?' But Ulmo said: 
'For this he was born into the world. And say unto me: 
whether is he Earendil Tuor's son of the line of Hador, or 
the son of Idril, Turgon's daughter, of the Elven-house of 
Finwe?' And Mandos answered: 'Equally the Noldor, who 
went wilfully into exile, may not return hither.' 

But when all was spoken, Manwe gave judgement, and 



he said: 'In this matter the power of doom is given to me. 
The peril that he ventured for love of the Two Kindreds shall 
not fall upon Earendil, nor shall it fall upon Elwing his wife, 
who entered into peril for love of him; but they shall not walk 
again ever among Elves or Men in the Outer Lands. And 
this is my decree concerning them: to Earendil and to 
Elwing, and to their sons, shall be given leave each to 
choose freely to which kindred their fates shall be joined, 
and under which kindred they shall be judged.' 

Now when Earendil was long time gone Elwing 
became lonely and afraid; and wandering by the margin of 
the sea she came near to Alqualonde, where lay the Telerin 
fleets. There the Teleri befriended her, and they listened to 
her tales of Doriath and Gondolin and the griefs of 
Beleriand, and they were filled with pity and wonder; and 
there Earendil returning found her, at the Haven of the 
Swans. But ere long they were summoned to Valimar; and 
there the decree of the Elder King was declared to them. 

Then Earendil said to Elwing: 'Choose thou, for now I 
am weary of the world.' And Elwing chose to be judged 
among the Firstborn Children of lluvatar, because of 
Luthien; and for her sake Earendil chose alike, though his 
heart was rather with the kindred of Men and the people of 
his father. Then at the bidding of the Valar Eonwe went to 
the shore of Aman, where the companions of Earendil still 
remained, awaiting tidings; and he took a boat, and the 
three mariners were set therein, and the Valar drove them 
away into the East with a great wind. But they took Vingilot, 
and hallowed it, and bore it away through Valinor to the 
uttermost rim of the world; and there it passed through the 
Door of Night and was lifted up even into the oceans of 
heaven. 

Now fair and marvellous was that vessel made, and it 
was filled with a wavering flame, pure and bright; and 
Earendil the Mariner sat at the helm, glistening with dust of 
elven-gems, and the Silmaril was bound upon his brow. Far 
he journeyed in that ship, even into the starless voids; but 
most often was he seen at morning or at evening, 
glimmering in sunrise or sunset, as he came back to 
Valinor from voyages beyond the confines of the world. 

On those journeys Elwing did not go, for she might not 
endure the cold and the pathless voids, and she loved 



rather the earth and the sweet winds that blow on sea and 
hill. Therefore there was built for her a white tower 
northward upon the borders of the Sundering Seas; and 
thither at times all the sea-birds of the earth repaired. And it 
is said that Elwing learned the tongues of birds, who herself 
had once worn their shape; and they taught her the craft of 
flight, and her wings were of white and silver-grey. And at 
times, when Earendil returning drew near again to Arda, 
she would fly to meet him, even as she had flown long ago, 
when she was rescued from the sea. Then the far-sighted 
among the Elves that dwelt in the Lonely Isle would see her 
like a white bird, shining, rose-stained in the sunset, as she 
soared in joy to greet the coming ofVingilotto haven. 

Now when first Vingilot was set to sail in the seas of 
heaven, it rose unlocked for, glittering and bright; and the 
people of Middle-earth beheld it from afar and wondered, 
and they took it for a sign, and called it Gil-Estel, the Star of 
High Hope. And when this new star was seen at evening, 
Maedhros spoke to Maglor his brother, and he said: 'Surely 
that is a Silmaril that shines now in the West?' 

And Maglor answered: 'If it be truly the Silmaril which 
we saw cast into the sea that rises again by the power of 
the Valar, then let us be glad; for its glory is seen now by 
many, and is yet secure from all evil.' Then the Elves looked 
up, and despaired no longer; but Morgoth was filled with 
doubt. 

Yet it is said that Morgoth looked not for the assault 
that came upon him from the West; for so great was his 
pride become that he deemed that none would ever again 
come with open war against him. Moreover he thought that 
he had for ever estranged the Noldor from the Lords of the 
West, and that content in their blissful realm the Valar would 
heed no more his kingdom in the world without; for to him 
that is pitiless the deeds of pity are ever strange and 
beyond reckoning. But the host of the Valar prepared for 
battle; and beneath their white banners marched the 
Vanyar, the people of Ingwe, and those also of the Noldor 
who never departed from Valinor, whose leader was 
Finarfin the son of Finwe. Few of the Teleri were willing to 
go forth to war, for they remembered the slaying at the 
Swan-haven, and the rape of their ships; but they 
hearkened to Elwing, who was the daughter of Dior Eluchil 



and come of their own kindred, and they sent mariners 
enough to sail the ships that bore the host of Valinor east 
over the sea. Yet they stayed aboard their vessels, and 
none of them set foot upon the Hither Lands. 

Of the march of the host of the Valar to the north of 
Middle-earth little is said in any tale; for among them went 
none of those Elves who had dwelt and suffered in the 
Hither Lands, and who made the histories of those days 
that still are known; and tidings of these things they only 
learned long afterwards from their kinsfolk in Aman. But at 
the last the might of Valinor came up out of the West, and 
the challenge of the trumpets of Eonwe filled the sky; and 
Beleriand was ablaze with the glory of their arms, for the 
host of the Valar were arrayed in forms young and fair and 
terrible, and the mountains rang beneath their feet. 

The meeting of the hosts of the West and of the North 
is named the Great Battle, and the War of Wrath. There 
was marshalled the whole power of the Throne of Morgoth, 
and it had become great beyond count, so that Anfauglith 
could not contain it; and all the North was aflame with war. 

But it availed him not. The Balrogs were destroyed, 
save some few that fled and hid themselves in caverns 
inaccessible at the roots of the earth; and the uncounted 
legions of the Ores perished like straw in a great fire, or 
were swept like shrivelled leaves before a burning wind. 
Few remained to trouble the world for long years after. And 
such few as were left of the three houses of the Elf-friends, 
Fathers of Men, fought upon the part of the Valar; and they 
were avenged in those days for Baragund and Barahir, 
Galdor and Gundor, Huor and Hurin, and many others of 
their lords. But a great part of the sons of Men, whether of 
the people of Uldor or others new-come out of the east, 
marched with the Enemy; and the Elves do not forget it. 

Then, seeing that his hosts were overthrown and his 
power dispersed, Morgoth quailed, and he dared not to 
come forth himself. But he loosed upon his foes the last 
desperate assault that he had prepared, and out of the pits 
of Angband there issued the winged dragons, that had not 
before been seen; and so sudden and ruinous was the 
onset of that dreadful fleet that the host of the Valar was 
driven back, for the coming of the dragons was with great 



thunder, and lightning, and a tempest of fire. 

But Earendil came, shining with white flame, and about 
Vingilot were gathered all the great birds of heaven and 
Thorondor was their captain, and there was battle in the air 
all the day and through a dark night of doubt. Before the 
rising of the sun Earendil slew Ancalagon the Black, the 
mightiest of the dragon-host, and cast him from the sky; 
and he fell upon the towers of Thangorodrim, and they were 
broken in his ruin. Then the sun rose, and the host of the 
Valar prevailed, and well-nigh all the dragons were 
destroyed; and all the pits of Morgoth were broken and 
unroofed, and the might of the Valar descended into the 
deeps of the earth. There Morgoth stood at last at bay, and 
yet unvaliant. He fled into the deepest of his mines, and 
sued for peace and pardon; but his feet were hewn from 
under him, and he was hurled upon his face. Then he was 
bound with the chain Angainor which he had worn 
aforetime, and his iron crown they beat into a collar for his 
neck, and his head was bowed upon his knees. And the 
two Silmarils which remained to Morgoth were taken from 
his crown, and they shone unsullied beneath the sky; and 
Eonwe took them, and guarded them. 

Thus an end was made of the power of Angband in the 
North, and' the evil realm was brought to naught; and out of 
the deep prisons a multitude of slaves came forth beyond 
all hope into the light of day, and they looked upon a world 
that was changed. For so great was the fury of those 
adversaries that the northern regions of the western world 
were rent asunder, and the sea roared in through many 
chasms, and there was confusion and great noise; and 
rivers perished or found new paths, and the valleys were 
upheaved and the hills trod down; and Sirion was no more. 

Then Eonwe as herald of the Elder King summoned 
the Elves of Beleriand to depart from Middle-earth. But 
Maedhros and Maglor would not hearken, and they 
prepared, though now with weariness and loathing, to 
attempt in despair the fulfilment of their oath; for they would 
have given battle for the Silmarils, were they withheld, even 
against the victorious host of Valinor, even though they 
stood alone against all the world. And they sent a message 
therefore to Eonwe, bidding him yield up now those jewels 
which of old Feanor their father made and Morgoth stole 



from him. 

But Eonwe answered that the right to the work of their 
father, which the sons of Feanor formerly possessed, had 
now perished, because of their many and merciless deeds, 
being blinded by their oath, and most of all because of their 
slaying of Dior and the assault upon the Havens. The light 
of the Silmarils should go now into the West, whence it 
came in the beginning; and to Valinor must Maedhros and 
Maglor return, and there abide the judgement of the Valar, 
by whose decree alone would Eonwe yield the jewels from 
his charge. Then Maglor desired indeed to submit, for his 
heart was sorrowful, and he said: The oath says not that we 
may not bide our time, and it may be that in Valinor all shall 
be forgiven and forgot, and we shall come into our own in 
peace. 

But Maedhros answered that if they returned to Aman 
but the favour of the Valar were withheld from them, then 
their oath would still remain, but its fulfilment be beyond all 
hope; and he said: 'Who can tell to what dreadful doom we 
shall come, if we disobey the Powers in their own land, or 
purpose ever to bring war again into their holy realm?' 

Yet Maglor still held back, saying: 'If Manwe and Varda 
themselves deny the fulfilment of an oath to which we 
named them in witness, is it not made void?' 

And Maedhros answered: 'But how shall our voices 
reach to lluvatar beyond the Circles of the World? And by 
lluvatar we swore in our madness, and called the 
Everlasting Darkness upon us, if we kept not our word. 
Who shall release us?' 

'If none can release us,' said Maglor, 'then indeed the 
Everlasting Darkness shall be our lot, whether we keep our 
oath or break it; but less evil shall we do in the breaking.' 

Yet he yielded at last to the will of Maedhros, and they 
took counsel together how they should lay hands on the 
Silmarils. And they disguised themselves, and came in the 
night to the camp of Eonwe, and crept into the place where 
the Silmarils were guarded; and they slew the guards, and 
laid hands on the jewels. Then all the camp was raised 
against them, and they prepared to die, defending 
themselves until the last. But Eonwe would not permit the 
slaying of the sons of Feanor; and departing unfought they 
fled far away. Each of them took to himself a Silmaril, for 



they said: 'Since one is lost to us, and but two remain, and 
we two alone of our brothers, so is it plain that fate would 
have us share the heirlooms of our father.' 

But the jewel burned the hand of Maedhros in pain 
unbearable; and he perceived that it was as Eonwe had 
said, and that his right thereto had become void, and that 
the oath was vain. And being in anguish and despair he 
cast himself into a gaping chasm filled with fire, and so 
ended; and the Silmaril that he bore was taken into the 
bosom of the Earth, 

And it is told of Maglor that he could not endure the 
pain with which the Silmaril tormented him; and he cast it at 
last into the Sea, and thereafter he wandered ever upon the 
shores, singing in pain and regret beside the waves. For 
Maglor was mighty among the singers of old, named only 
after Daeron of Doriath; but he came never back among 
the people of the Elves. And thus it came to pass that the 
Silmarils found their long homes: one in the airs of heaven, 
and one in the fires of the heart of the world, and one in the 
deep waters. 

In those days there was a great building of ships upon 
the shores of the Western Sea; and thence in many a fleet 
the Eldar set sail into the West, and came never back to the 
lands of weeping and of war. And the Vanya r returned 
beneath their white banners, and were borne in triumph to 
Valinor; but their joy in victory was diminished, for they 
returned without the Silmarils from Morgoth's crown, and 
they knew that those jewels could not be found or brought 
together again unless the world be broken and remade. 

And when they came into the West the Elves of 
Beleriand dwelt upon Tol Eressea, the Lonely Isle, that 
looks both west and east; whence they might come even to 
Valinor. They were admitted again to the love of Manwe 
and the pardon of the Valar; and the Teleri forgave their 
ancient grief, and the curse was laid to rest. 


www.TedNasmith.com 


Maglor Coal* a Silmaril into the Sea - Copyright © Ted Nasmith. AH rights rnentd. 



Yet not all the Eldalie were willing to forsake the Hither 
Lands where they had long suffered and long dwelt; and 
some lingered many an age in Middle-earth. Among those 
were Cirdan the Shipwright, and Celeborn of Doriath, with 
Galadriel his wife, who alone remained of those who led the 


Noldor to exile in Beleriand. In Middle-earth dwelt also Gil- 
galad the High King, and with him was Elrond Half-elven, 
who chose, as was granted to him, to be numbered among 
the Eldar; but Elros his brother chose to abide with Men. 
And from these brethren alone has come among Men the 
blood of the Firstborn and a strain of the spirits divine that 
were before Arda; for they were the sons of Elwing, Dior's 
daughter, Luthien's son, child of Thingol and Melian; and 
Earendil their father was the son of Idril Celebrindal, 
Turgon's daughter of Gondolin. 

But Morgoth himself the Valar thrust through the Door 
of Night beyond the Walls of the World, into the Timeless 
Void; and a guard is set for ever on those walls, and 
Earendil keeps watch upon the ramparts of the sky. Yet the 
lies that Melkor, the mighty and accursed, Morgoth Bauglir, 
the Power of Terror and of Hate, sowed in the hearts of 
Elves and Men are a seed that does not die and cannot be 
destroyed; and ever and anon it sprouts anew, and will bear 
dark fruit even unto the latest days. 


Here ends the SILMARILLION. If it has 
passed from the high and the beautiful to 
darkness and ruin, that was of old the fate of Arda 
Marred; and if any change shall come and the 
Marring be amended, Manwe and Varda may 
know; but they have not revealed it, and it is not 
declared in the dooms of Mandos. 


