
AKALLABETH 

The Downfall of Numenor 



It is said by the Eldar that Men came into the world in 
the time of the Shadow of Morgoth, and they fell swiftly 
under his dominion; for he sent his emissaries among 
them, and they listened to his evil and cunning words, and 
they worshipped the Darkness and yet feared it. But there 
were some that turned from evil and left the lands of their 
kindred, and wandered ever westward; for they had heard a 
rumour that in the West there was a light which the Shadow 
could not dim. The servants of Morgoth pursued them with 
hatred, and their ways were long and hard; yet they came at 
last to the lands that look upon the Sea, and they entered 
Beleriand in the days of the War of the Jewels. The Edain 
these were named in the Sindarin tongue; and they 
became friends and allies of the Eldar, and did deeds of 
great valour in the war against Morgoth. 

Of them was sprung, upon the side of his fathers, 
Bright Earendil; and in the Lay of Earendil it is told how at 
the last, when the victory of Morgoth was almost complete, 
he built his ship Vingilot, that Men called Rothinzil, and 
voyaged upon the unsailed seas, seeking ever for Valinor; 
for he desired to speak before the Powers on behalf of the 
Two Kindreds, that the Valar might have pity on them and 
send them help in their uttermost need. Therefore by Elves 
and Men he is called Earendil the Blessed, for he achieved 
his quest after long labours and many perils, and from 
Valinor there came the host of the Lords of the West. But 
Earendil came never back to the lands that he had loved. 

In the Great Battle when at last Morgoth was 
overthrown and Thangorodrim was broken, the Edain alone 
of the kindreds of Men fought for the Valar, whereas many 
others fought for Morgoth. And after the victory of the Lords 
of the West those of the evil Men who were not destroyed 
fled back into the east, where many of their race were still 
wandering in the unharvested lands, wild and lawless, 
refusing alike the summons of the Valar and of Morgoth. 
And the evil Men came among them, and cast over them a 
shadow of fear, and they took them for kings. Then the 


Valar forsook for a time the Men of Middle-earth who had 
refused their summons and had taken the friends of 
Morgoth to be their masters; and Men dwelt in darkness 
and were troubled by many evil things that Morgoth had 
devised in the days of his dominion: demons, and dragons, 
and misshapen beasts, and the unclean Ores that are 
mockeries of the Children of lluvatar. And the lot of Men 
was unhappy. 

But Manwe put forth Morgoth and shut him beyond the 
World in the Void that is without; and he cannot himself 
return again into the World, present and visible, while the 
Lords of the West are still enthroned. Yet the seeds that he 
had planted still grew and sprouted, bearing evil fruit, if any 
would tend them. For his will remained and guided his 
servants, moving them ever to thwart the will of the Valar 
and to destroy those that obeyed them. This the Lords of 
the West knew full well. When therefore Morgoth had been 
thrust forth, they held council concerning the ages that 
should come after. The Eldar they summoned to return into 
the West, and those that hearkened to the summons dwelt 
in the Isle of Eressea; and there is in that land a haven that 
is named Avallone, for it is of all cities the nearest to 
Valinor, and the tower of Avallone is the first sight that the 
mariner beholds when at last he draws nigh to the Undying 
Lands over the leagues of the Sea. To the Fathers of Men 
of the three faithful houses rich reward also was given. 
Eonwe came among them and taught them; and they were 
given wisdom and power and life more enduring than any 
others of mortal race have possessed. A land was made 
for the Edain to dwell in, neither part of Middle-earth nor of 
Valinor, for it was sundered from either by a wide sea; yet it 
was nearer to Valinor. It was raised by Osse out of the 
depths of the Great Water, and it was established by Aule 
and enriched by Yavanna; and the Eldar brought thither 
flowers and fountains out of Tol Eressea. That land the 
Valar called Andor, the Land of Gift; and the Star of 
Earendil shone bright in the West as a token that all was 
made ready, and as a guide over the sea; and Men 
marvelled to see that silver flame in the paths of the Sun. 

Then the Edain set sail upon the deep waters, 
following the Star; and the Valar laid a peace upon the sea 
for many days, and sent sunlight and a sailing wind, so that 



the waters glittered before the eyes of the Edain like 
rippling glass, and the foam flew like snow before the 
stems of their ships. But so bright was Rothinzil that even at 
morning Men could see it glimmering in the West, and in 
the cloudless night it shone alone, for no other star could 
stand beside it. And setting their course towards it the 
Edain came at last over leagues of sea and saw afar the 
land that was prepared for them, Andor, the Land of Gift, 
shimmering in a golden haze. Then they went up out of the 
sea and found a country fair and fruitful, and they were glad. 
And they called that land Elenna, which is Starwards; but 
also Anadune, which is Westernesse, Numenore in the 
High Eldarin tongue. 

This was the beginning of that people that in the Grey- 
elven speech are called the Dunedain: the Numenoreans, 
Kings among Men. But they did not thus escape from the 
doom of death that lluvatar had set upon all Mankind, and 
they were mortal still, though their years were long, and they 
knew no sickness, ere the shadow fell upon them. 
Therefore they grew wise and glorious, and in all things 
more like to the Firstborn than any other of the kindreds of 
Men; and they were tall, taller than the tallest of the sons of 
Middle-earth; and the light of their eyes was like the bright 
stars. But their numbers increased only slowly in the land, 
for though daughters and sons were born to them, fairer 
than their fathers, yet their children were few. 

Of old the chief city and haven of Numenor was in the 
midst of its western coasts, and it was called Andunie 
because it faced the sunset. But in the midst of the land 
was a mountain tall and steep, and it was named the 
Meneltarma, the Pillar of Heaven, and upon it was a high 
place that was hallowed to Eru lluvatar, and it was open and 
unroofed, and no other temple or fane was there in the land 
of the Numenoreans. At the feet of the mountain were built 
the tombs of the Kings, and hard by upon a hill was 
Armenelos, fairest of cities, and there stood the tower and 
the citadel that was raised by Elros son of Earendil, whom 
the Valar appointed to be the first King of the Dunedain. 

Now Elros and Elrond his brother were descended 
from the Three Houses of the Edain, but in part also both 
from the Eldar and the Maiar; for Idril of Gondolin and 
Luthien daughter of Melian were their fore-mothers. The 



Valar indeed may not withdraw the gift of death, which 
comes to Men from lluvatar, but in the matter of the Half- 
elven lluvatar gave to them the judgement; and they judged 
that to the sons of Earendil should be given choice of their 
own destiny. And Elrond chose to remain with the Firstborn, 
and to him the life of the Firstborn was granted. But to 
Elros, who chose to be a king of Men, still a great span of 
years was allotted, many times that of the Men of Middle- 
earth; and all his line, the kings and lords of the royal house, 
had long life even according to the measure of the 
Numenoreans. But Elros lived five hundred years, and ruled 
the Numenoreans four hundred years and ten. 

Thus the years passed, and while Middle-earth went 
backward and light and wisdom faded, the Dunedain dwelt 
under the protection of the Valar and in the friendship of the 
Eldar, and they increased in stature both of mind and body. 
For though this people used still their own speech, their 
kings and lords knew and spoke also the Elven tongue, 
which they had learned in the days of their alliance, and 
thus they held converse still with the Eldar, whether of 
Eressea or of the west-lands of Middle-earth. And the 
loremasters among them learned also the High Eldarin 
tongue of the Blessed Realm, in which much story and song 
was preserved from the beginning of the world; and they 
made letters and scrolls and books, and wrote in them 
many things of wisdom and wonder in the high tide of their 
realm, of which all is now forgot. So it came to pass that, 
beside their own names, all the lords of the Numenoreans 
had also Eldarin names; and the like with the cities and fair 
places that they founded in Numenor and on the shores of 
the Hither Lands. 

For the Dunedain became mighty in crafts, so that if 
they had had the mind they could easily have surpassed the 
evil kings of Middle-earth in the making of war and the 
forging of weapons; but they were become men of peace. 
Above all arts they nourished shipbuilding and sea-craft, 
and they became mariners whose like shall never be again 
since the world was diminished; and voyaging upon the 
wide seas was the chief feat and adventure of their hardy 
men in the gallant days of their youth. 

But the Lords of Valinor forbade them to sail so far 
westward that the coasts of Numenor could no longer be 



seen; and for long the Dunedain were content, though they 
did not fully understand the purpose of this ban. But the 
design of Manwe was that the Numenoreans should not be 
tempted to seek for the Blessed Realm, nor desire to 
overpass the limits set to their bliss, becoming enamoured 
of the immortality of the Valar and the Eldar and the lands 
where all things endure. 



For in those days Valinor still remained in the world 
visible, and there lluvatar permitted the Valar to maintain 
upon Earth an abiding place, a memorial of that which 
might have been if Morgoth had not cast his shadow on the 
world. This the Numenoreans knew full well; and at times, 
when all the air was clear and the sun was in the east, they 
would look out and descry far off in the west a city white- 
shining on a distant shore, and a great harbour and a 
tower. For in those days the Numenoreans were far- 
sighted; yet even so it was only the keenest eyes among 
them that could see this vision, from the Meneltarma, 
maybe, or from some tall ship that lay off their western 
coast as far as it was lawful for them to go. For they did not 


dare to break the Ban of the Lords of the West. But the 
wise among them knew that this distant land was not 
indeed the Blessed Realm of Valinor, but was Avallone, the 
haven of the Eldar upon Eressea, easternmost of the 
Undying Lands. And thence at times the Firstborn still 
would come sailing to Numenor in oarless boats, as white 
birds flying from the sunset. And they brought to Numenor 
many gifts: birds of song, and fragrant flowers, and herbs of 
great virtue. And a seedling they brought of Celeborn, the 
White Tree that grew in the midst of Eressea; and that was 
in its turn a seedling of Galathilion the Tree of Tuna, the 
image of Telperion that Yavanna gave to the Eldar in the 
Blessed Realm. And the tree grew and blossomed in the 
courts of the King inArmenelos; Nimloth it was named, and 
flowered in the evening, and the shadows of night it filled 
with its fragrance. 

Thus it was that because of the Ban of the Valar the 
voyages of the Dunedain in those days went ever eastward 
and not westward, from the darkness of the North to the 
heats of the South, and beyond the South to the Nether 
Darkness; and they came even into the inner seas, and 
sailed about Middle-earth and glimpsed from their high 
prows the Gates of Morning in the East. And the Dunedain 
came at times to the shores of the Great Lands, and they 
took pity on the forsaken world of Middle-earth; and the 
Lords of Numenor set foot again upon the western shores 
in the Dark Years of Men, and none yet dared to withstand 
them. For most of the Men of that age that sat under the 
Shadow were now grown weak and fearful. And coming 
among them the Numenoreans taught them many things. 
Corn and wine they brought, and they instructed Men in the 
sowing of seed and the grinding of grain, in the hewing of 
wood and the shaping of stone, and in the ordering of their 
life, such as it might be in the lands of swift death and little 
bliss. 

Then the Men of Middle-earth were comforted, and 
here and there upon the western shores the houseless 
woods drew back, and Men shook off the yoke of the 
offspring of Morgoth, and unlearned their terror of the dark. 
And they revered the memory of the tall Sea-kings, and 
when they had departed they called them gods, hoping for 
their return; for at that time the Numenoreans dwelt never 



long in Middle-earth, nor made there as yet any habitation 
of their own. Eastward they must sail, but ever west their 
hearts returned. 

Now this yearning grew ever greater with the years; 
and the Numenoreans began to hunger for the undying city 
that they saw from afar, and the desire of everlasting life, to 
escape from death and the ending of delight, grew strong 
upon them; and ever as their power and glory grew greater 
their unquiet increased. For though the Valar had rewarded 
the Dunedain with long life, they could not take from them 
the weariness of the world that comes at last, and they 
died, even their kings of the seed of Earendil; and the span 
of their lives was brief in the eyes of the Eldar. Thus it was 
that a shadow fell upon them: in which maybe the will of 
Morgoth was at work that still moved in the world. And the 
Numenoreans began to murmur, at first in their hearts, and 
then in open words, against the doom of Men, and most of 
all against the Ban which forbade them to sail into the 
West. 

And they said among themselves: 'Why do the Lords 
of the West sit there in peace unending, while we must die 
and go we know not whither, leaving our home and all that 
we have made? And the Eldar die not, even those that 
rebelled against the Lords. And since we have mastered all 
seas, and no water is so wild or so wide that our ships 
cannot overcome it, why should we not go to Avallone and 
greet there our friends?' 

And some there were who said: 'Why should we not go 
even to Aman, and taste there, were it but for a day, the 
bliss of the Powers? Have we not become mighty among 
the people of Arda?' 

The Eldar reported these words to the Valar, and 
Manwe was grieved, seeing a cloud gather on the noontide 
of Numenor. And he sent messengers to the Dunedain, 
who spoke earnestly to the King, and to all who would 
listen, concerning the fate and fashion of the world. 

'The Doom of the World,' they said, 'One alone can 
change who made it. And were you so to voyage that 
escaping all deceits and snares you came indeed to Aman, 
the Blessed Realm, little would it profit you. For it is not the 
land of Manwe that makes its people deathless, but the 
Deathless that dwell therein have hallowed the land; and 



there you would but wither and grow weary the sooner, as 
moths in a light too strong and steadfast.' 

But the King said: 'And does not Earendil, my 
forefather, live? Or is he not in the land of Aman?' 

To which they answered: 'You know that he has a fate 
apart, and was adjudged to the Firstborn who die not; yet 
this also is his doom that he can never return again to 
mortal lands. Whereas you and your people are not of the 
Firstborn, but are mortal Men as lluvatar made you. Yet it 
seems that you desire now to have the good of both 
kindreds, to sail to Valinor when you will, and to return when 
you please to your homes. That cannot be. Nor can the 
Valar take away the gifts of lluvatar. The Eldar, you say, are 
unpunished, and even those who rebelled do not die. Yet 
that is to them neither reward nor punishment, but the 
fulfilment of their being. They cannot escape, and are 
bound to this world, never to leave it so long as it lasts, for 
its life is theirs. And you are punished for the rebellion of 
Men, you say, in which you had small part, and so it is that 
you die. But that was not at first appointed for a 
punishment. Thus you escape, and leave the world, and are 
not bound to it, in hope or in weariness. Which of us 
therefore should envy the others?" 

And the Numenoreans answered: 'Why should we not 
envy the Valar, or even the least of the Deathless? For of us 
is required a blind trust, and a hope without assurance, 
knowing not what lies before us in a little while. And yet we 
also love the Earth and would not lose it.' 

Then the Messengers said: 'Indeed the mind of lluvatar 
concerning you is not known to the Valar, and he has not 
revealed all things that are to come. But this we hold to be 
true, that your home is not here, neither in the Land of Aman 
nor anywhere within the Circles of the World. And the Doom 
of Men, that they should depart, was at first a gift of lluvatar. 
It became a grief to them only because coming under the 
shadow of Morgoth it seemed to them that they were 
surrounded by a great darkness, of which they were afraid; 
and some grew wilful and proud and would not yield, until 
life was reft from them. We who bear the ever-mounting 
burden of the years do not clearly understand this; but if that 
grief has returned to trouble you, as you say, then we fear 
that the Shadow arises once more and grows again in your 



hearts. Therefore, though you be the Dunedain, fairest of 
Men, who escaped from the Shadow of old and fought 
valiantly against it, we say to you: Beware! The will of Eru 
may not be gainsaid; and the Valar bid you earnestly not to 
withhold the trust to which you are called, lest soon it 
become again a bond by which you are constrained. Hope 
rather that in the end even the least of your desires shall 
have fruit. The love of Arda was set in your hearts by 
lluvatar, and he does not plant to no purpose. Nonetheless, 
many ages of Men unborn may pass ere that purpose is 
made known; and to you it will be revealed and not to the 
Valar.' 

These things took place in the days of Tar-Ciryatan the 
Shipbuilder, and of Tar-Atanamir his son; and they were 
proud men, eager for wealth, and they laid the men of 
Middle-earth under tribute, taking now rather than giving. It 
was to Tar-Atanamir that the Messengers came; and he 
was the thirteenth King, and in his day the Realm of 
Numenor had endured for more than two thousand years, 
and was come to the zenith of its bliss, if not yet of its 
power. ButAtanamir was ill pleased with the counsel of the 
Messengers and gave little heed to it, and the greater part 
of his people followed him; for they wished still to escape 
death in their own day, not waiting upon hope. And 
Atanamir lived to a great age, clinging to his life beyond the 
end of all joy; and he was the first of the Numenoreans to do 
this, refusing to depart until he was witless and unmanned, 
and denying to his son the kingship at the height of his 
days. For the Lords of Numenor had been wont to wed late 
in their long lives and to depart and leave the mastery to 
their sons when these were come to full stature of body and 
mind. 

Then Tar-Ancalimon, son of Atanamir, became King, 
and he was of like mind; and in his day the people of 
Numenor became divided. On the one hand was the 
greater party, and they were called the King's Men, and 
they grew proud and were estranged from the Eldar and the 
Valar. And on the other hand was the lesser party, and they 
were called the Elendili, the Elf-friends; for though they 
remained loyal indeed to the King and the House of Elros, 
they wished to keep the friendship of the Eldar, and they 
hearkened to the counsel of the Lords of the West. 



Nonetheless even they, who named themselves the Faithful, 
did not wholly escape from the affliction of their people, and 
they were troubled by the thought of death. 

Thus the bliss of Westernesse became diminished; 
but still its might and splendour increased. For the kings 
and their people had not yet abandoned wisdom, and if 
they loved the Valar no longer at least they still feared them. 
They did not dare openly to break the Ban or to sail beyond 
the limits that had been appointed. Eastwards still they 
steered their tall ships. But the fear of death grew ever 
darker upon them, and they delayed it by all means that 
they could; and they began to build great houses for their 
dead, while their wise men laboured unceasingly to 
discover if they might the secret of recalling life, or at the 
least of the prolonging of Men's days. Yet they achieved 
only the art of preserving incorrupt the dead flesh of Men, 
and they filled all the land with silent tombs in which the 
thought of death was enshrined in the darkness. But those 
that lived turned the more eagerly to pleasure and revelry, 
desiring ever more goods and more riches; and after the 
days of Tar-Ancalimon the offering of the first fruits to Eru 
was neglected, and men went seldom any more to the 
Hallow upon the heights of Meneltarma in the midst of the 
land. 

Thus it came to pass in that time that the 
Numenoreans first made great settlements upon the west 
shores of the ancient lands; for their own land seemed to 
them shrunken, and they had no rest or content therein, and 
they desired now wealth and dominion in Middle-earth, 
since the West was denied. Great harbours and strong 
towers they made, and there many of them took up their 
abode; but they appeared now rather as lords and masters 
and gatherers of tribute than as helpers and teachers. And 
the great ships of the Numenoreans were borne east on the 
winds and returned ever laden, and the power and majesty 
of their kings were increased; and they drank and they 
feasted and they clad themselves in silver and gold. 

In all this the Elf-friends had small part They alone 
came now ever to the north and the land of Gil-galad, 
keeping their friendship with the Elves and lending them aid 
against Sauron; and their haven was Pelargir above the 
mouths of Anduin the Great. But the King's Men sailed far 



away to the south; and the lordships and strongholds that 
they made have left many rumours in the legends of Men. 

In this Age, as is elsewhere told, Sauron arose again 
in Middle-earth, and grew, and turned back to the evil in 
which he was nurtured by Morgoth, becoming mighty in his 
service. Already in the days of Tar-Minastir, the eleventh 
King of Numenor, he had fortified the land of Mordor and 
had built there the Tower of Barad-dur, and thereafter he 
strove ever for the dominion of Middle-earth, to become a 
king over all kings and as a god unto Men. And Sauron 
hated the Numenoreans, because of the deeds of their 
fathers and their ancient alliance with the Elves and 
allegiance to the Valar; nor did he forget the aid that Tar- 
Minastir had rendered to Gil-galad of old, in that time when 
the One Ring was forged and there was war between 
Sauron and the Elves in Eriador. Now he learned that the 
kings of Numenor had increased in power and splendour, 
and he hated them the more; and he feared them, lest they 
should invade his lands and wrest from him the dominion of 
the East. But for a long time he did not dare to challenge 
the Lords of the Sea, and he withdrew from the coasts. 

Yet Sauron was ever guileful, and it is said that among 
those whom he ensnared with the Nine Rings three were 
great lords of Numenorean race. And when the Ulairi arose 
that were the Ring-wraiths, his servants, and the strength of 
his terror and mastery over Men had grown exceedingly 
great, he began to assail the strong places of the 
Numenoreans upon the shores of the sea. 

In those days the Shadow grew deeper upon 
Numenor; and the lives of the Kings of the House of Elros 
waned because of their rebellion, but they hardened their 
hearts the more against the Valar. And the nineteenth king 
took the sceptre of his fathers, and he ascended the throne 
in the name of Adunakhor, Lord of the West, forsaking the 
Elven-tongues and forbidding their use in his hearing. Yet hi 
the Scroll of Kings the name Herunumen was inscribed in 
the High-elven speech, because of ancient custom, which 
the kings feared to break utterly, lest evil befall Now this title 
seemed to the Faithful over-proud, being the title of the 
Valar; and their hearts were sorely tried between their 
loyalty to the House of Elros and their reverence of the 



appointed Powers. But worse was yet to come. For Ar- 
Gimilzor the twenty-second king was the greatest enemy of 
the Faithful. In his day the White Tree was untended and 
began to decline; and he forbade utterly the use of the 
Elven-tongues, and punished those that welcomed the 
ships of Eressea, that still came secretly to the west-shores 
of the land. 

Now the Elendili dwelt mostly in the western regions of 
Numenor; but Ar-Gimilzor commanded all that he could 
discover to be of this party to remove from the west and 
dwell in the east of the land; and there they were watched. 
And the chief dwelling of the Faithful in the later days was 
thus nigh to the harbour of Romenna; thence many set sail 
to Middle-earth, seeking the northern coasts where they 
might speak still with the Eldar in the kingdom of Gil-galad. 
This was known to the kings, but they hindered it not, so 
long as the Elendili departed from their land and did not 
return; for they desired to end all friendship between then: 
people and the Eldar of Eressea, whom they named the 
Spies of the Valar, hoping to keep their deeds and their 
counsels hidden from the Lords of the West. But all that 
they did was known to Manwe, and the Valar were wroth 
with the Kings of Numenor, and gave them counsel and 
protection no more; and the ships of Eressea came never 
again out of the sunset, and the havens of Andunie were 
forlorn. 

Highest in honour after the house of the kings were the 
Lords of Andunie; for they were of the line of Elros, being 
descended from Silmarien, daughter of Tar-Elendil the 
fourth king of Numenor. And these lords were loyal to the 
kings, and revered them; and the Lord of Andunie was ever 
among the chief councillors of the Sceptre. Yet also from 
the beginning they bore especial love to the Eldar and 
reverence for the Valar; and as the Shadow grew they 
aided the Faithful as they could. But for long they did not 
declare themselves openly, and sought rather to amend the 
hearts of the lords of the Sceptre with wiser counsels. 

There was a lady Inzilbeth, renowned for her beauty, 
and her mother was Lindorie, sister of Earendur, the Lord 
of Andunie in the days of Ar-Sakalthor father of Ar-Gimilzor. 
Gimilzor took her to wife, though this was little to her liking, 
for she was in heart one of the Faithful, being taught by her 



mother; but the kings and their sons were grown proud and 
not to be gainsaid in their wishes. No love was there 
between Ar-Gi mi Izor and his queen, or between their sons. 
Inziladun, the elder, was like his mother in mind as in body; 
but Gimilkhad, the younger, went with his father, unless he 
were yet prouder and more wilful. To him Ar-Gi mi Izor would 
have yielded the sceptre rather than to the elder son, if the 
laws had allowed. 

But when Inziladun acceded to the sceptre, he took 
again a title in the Elven-tongue as of old, calling himself 
Tar-Palantir, for he was far-sighted both in eye and in mind, 
and even those that hated him feared his words as those of 
a true-seer. He gave peace for a while to the Faithful; and 
he went once more at due seasons to the Hallow of Eru 
upon the Meneltarma, which Ar-Gi mi Izor had forsaken. The 
White Tree he tended again with honour; and he 
prophesied, saying that when the Tree perished, then also 
would the line of the Kings come to its end. But his 
repentance was too late to appease the anger of the Valar 
with the insolence of his fathers, of which the greater part of 
his people did not repent. And Gimilkhad was strong and 
ungentle, and he took the leadership of those that had been 
called the King's Men and opposed the will of his brother as 
openly as he dared, and yet more in secret. Thus the days 
of Tar-Palantir became darkened with grief; and he would 
spend much of his time in the west, and there ascended 
often the ancient tower of King Minastir upon the hill of 
Oromet nigh to Andunie, whence he gazed westward in 
yearning, hoping to see, maybe, some sail upon the sea. 
But no ship came ever again from the West to Numenor, 
and Avallone was veiled in cloud. 

Now Gimilkhad died two years before his two 
hundredth year (which was accounted an early death for 
one of Elros' line even in its waning), but this brought no 
peace to the King. For Pharazon son of Gimilkhad had 
become a man yet more restless and eager for wealth and 
power than his father. He had fared often abroad, as a 
leader in the wars that the Numenoreans made then in the 
coastlands of Middle-earth, seeking to extend their 
dominion over Men; and thus he had won great renown as 
a captain both by land and by sea. Therefore when he 
came back to Numenor, hearing of his father's death, the 



hearts of the people were turned to him; for he brought with 
him great wealth, and was for the time free in his giving. 

And it came to pass that Tar-Palantir grew weary of 
grief and died. He had no son, but a daughter only, whom 
he named Miriel in the Elven-tongue; and to her now by right 
and the laws of the Numenoreans came the sceptre. But 
Pharazon took her to wife against her will, doing evil in this 
and evil also in that the laws of Numenor did not permit the 
marriage, even in the royal house, of those more nearly 
akin than cousins in the second degree. And when they 
were wedded, he seized the sceptre into his own hand, 
taking the title of Ar-Pharazon (Tar-Calion in the Elven- 
tongue); and the name of his queen he changed to Ar- 
Zimraphel. 

The mightiest and proudest was Ar-Pharazon the 
Golden of all those that had wielded the Sceptre of the 
Sea-Kings since the foundation of Numenor; and three and 
twenty Kings and Queens had ruled the Numenoreans 
before, and slept now in their deep tombs under the mount 
of Meneltarma, lying upon beds of gold. 

And sitting upon his carven throne in the city of 
Armenelos in the glory of his power, he brooded darkly, 
thinking of war. For he had learned in Middle-earth of the 
strength of the realm of Sauron, and of his hatred of 
Westernesse. And now there came to him the masters of 
ships and captains returning out of the East, and they 
reported that Sauron was putting forth his might, since Ar- 
Pharazon had gone back from Middle-earth, and he was 
pressing down upon the cities by the coasts; and he had 
taken now the title of King of Men, and declared his 
purpose to drive the Numenoreans into the sea, and 
destroy even Numenor, if that might be. 

Great was the anger of Ar-Pharazon at these tidings, 
and as he pondered long in secret, his heart was filled with 
the desire of power unbounded and the sole dominion of 
his will. And he determined without counsel of the Valar, or 
the aid of any wisdom but his own, that the title of King of 
Men he would himself claim, and would compel Sauron to 
become his vassal and his servant; for in his pride he 
deemed that no king should ever arise so mighty as to vie 
with the Heir of Earendil. Therefore he began in that time to 
smithy great hoard of weapons, and many ships of war he 



built and stored them with his arms; and when all was made 
ready he himself set sail with his host into the East. 

And men saw his sails coming up out of the sunset, 
dyed as with scarlet and gleaming with red and gold, and 
fear fell upon the dwellers by the coasts, and they fled far 
away. But the fleet came at last to that place that was called 
Umbar, where was the mighty haven of the Numenoreans 
that no hand had wrought. Empty and silent were all the 
lands about when the King of the Sea marched upon 
Middle-earth. For seven days he journeyed with banner and 
trumpet, and he came to a hill, and he went up, and he set 
there his pavilion and his throne; and he sat him down in the 
midst of the land, and the tents of his host were ranged all 
about him, blue, golden, and white, as a field of tall flowers. 
Then he sent forth heralds, and he commanded Sauron to 
come before him and swear to him fealty. 

And Sauron came. Even from his mighty tower of 
Barad-dur he came, and made no offer of battle. For he 
perceived that the power and majesty of the Kings of the 
Sea surpassed all rumour of them, so that he could not trust 
even the greatest of his servants to withstand them; and he 
saw not his time yet to work his will with the Dunedain. And 
he was crafty, well skilled to gain what he would by subtlety 
when force might not avail. Therefore he humbled himself 
before Ar-Pharazon and smoothed his tongue; and men 
wondered, for all that he said seemed fair and wise. 

But Ar-Pharazon was not yet deceived, and it came 
into his mind that, for the better keeping of Sauron and of 
his oaths of fealty, he should be brought to Numenor, there 
to dwell as a hostage for himself and all his servants in 
Middle-earth. To this Sauron assented as one constrained, 
yet in his secret thought he received it gladly, for it chimed 
indeed with his desire. And Sauron passed over the sea 
and looked upon the land of Numenor, and on the city of 
Armenelos in the days of its glory, and he was astounded; 
but his heart within was filled the more with envy and hate. 

Yet such was the cunning of his mind and mouth, and 
the strength of his hidden will, that ere three years had 
passed he had become closest to the secret counsels of 
the King; for flattery sweet as honey was ever on his 
tongue, and knowledge he had of many things yet 
unrevealed to Men. And seeing the favour that he had of 



their lord all the councillors began to fawn upon him, save 
one alone, Amandil lord of Andunie. Then slowly a change 
came over the land, and the hearts of the Elf-friends were 
sorely troubled, and many fell away out of fear; and although 
those that remained still called themselves the Faithful, their 
enemies named them rebels. For now, having the ears of 
men, Sauron with many arguments gainsaid all that the 
Valar had taught; and he bade men think that in the world, 
in the east and even hi the west, there lay yet many seas 
and many lands for their winning, wherein was wealth 
uncounted. And still, if they should at the last come to the 
end of those lands and seas, beyond all lay the Ancient 
Darkness. 'And out of it the world was made. For Darkness 
alone is worshipful, and the Lord thereof may yet make 
other worlds to be gifts to those that serve him, so that the 
increase of their power shall find no end.' 

And Ar-Pharazon said: 'Who is the Lord of the 
Darkness?' 

Then behind locked doors Sauron spoke to the King, 
and he lied, saying: 'It is he whose name is not now spoken; 
for the Valar have deceived you concerning him, putting 
forward the name of Eru, a phantom devised in the folly of 
their hearts, seeking to enchain Men in servitude to 
themselves. For they are the oracle of this Eru, which 
speaks only what they will. But he that is their master shall 
yet prevail, and he will deliver you from this phantom; and 
his name is Melkor, Lord of All, Giver of Freedom, and he 
shall make you stronger than they.' 

Then Ar-Pharazon the King turned back to the worship 
of the Dark, and of Melkor the Lord thereof, at first in secret, 
but ere long openly and in the face of his people; and they 
for the most part followed him. Yet there dwelt still a 
remnant of the Faithful, as has been told, at Romenna and 
in the country near, and other few there were here and there 
in the land. The chief among them, to whom they looked for 
leading and courage in evil days, was Amandil, councillor 
of the King, and his son Elendil, whose sons were Isildur 
and Anarion, then young men by the reckoning of Numenor. 
Amandil and Elendil were great ship-captains; and they 
were of the line of Elros Tar-Minyatur, though not of the 
ruling house to whom belonged the crown and the throne in 
the city of Armenelos. In the days of their youth together 



Amandil had been dear to Pharazon, and though he was of 
the Elf-friends he remained in his council until the coming of 
Sauron. Now he was dismissed, for Sauron hated him 
above all others in Numenor. But he was so noble, and had 
been so mighty a captain of the sea, that he was still held in 
honour by many of the people, and neither the King nor 
Sauron dared to lay hands on him as yet. 

Therefore Amandil withdrew to Romenna, and all that 
he trusted still to be faithful he summoned to come thither in 
secret; for he feared that evil would now grow apace, and 
all the Elf-friends were in peril. And so it soon came to 
pass. For the Meneltarma was utterly deserted in those 
days; and though not even Sauron dared to defile the high 
place, yet the King would let no man, upon pain of death, 
ascend to it, not even those of the Faithful who kept lluvatar 
in their hearts. And Sauron urged the King to cut down the 
White Tree, Nimloth the Fair, that grew in his courts, for it 
was a memorial of the Eldar and of the light of Valinor. 

At the first the King would not assent to this, since be 
believed that the fortunes of his house were bound up with 
the Tree, as was forespoken by Tar-Palantir. Thus in his 
folly he who now hated the Eldar and the Valar vainly clung 
to the shadow of the old allegiance of Numenor. But when 
Amandil heard rumour of the evil purpose of Sauron he was 
grieved to the heart, knowing that in the end Sauron would 
surely have his will. Then he spoke to Elendil and the sons 
of Elendil, recalling the tale of the Trees of Valinor; and 
Isildur said no word, but went out by night and did a deed 
for which he was afterwards renowned. For he passed 
alone in disguise to Armenelos and to the courts of the 
King, which were now forbidden to the Faithful; and he 
came to the place of the Tree, which was forbidden to all by 
the orders of Sauron, and the Tree was watched day and 
night by guards in his service. At that time Nimloth was dark 
and bore no bloom, for it was late in the autumn, and its 
winter was nigh; and Isildur passed through the guards and 
took from the Tree a fruit that hung upon it, and turned to go. 
But the guard was aroused, and he was assailed, and 
fought his way out, receiving many wounds; and he 
escaped, and because he was disguised it was not 
discovered who had laid hands on the Tree. But Isildur 
came at last hardly back to Romenna and delivered the fruit 



to the hands of Amandil, ere his strength failed him. Then 
the fruit was planted in secret, and it was blessed by 
Amandil; and a shoot arose from it and sprouted in the 
spring. But when its first leaf opened then Isildur, who had 
lain long and come near to death, arose and was troubled 
no more by his wounds. 

None too soon was this done; for after the assault the 
King yielded to Sauron and felled the White Tree, and 
turned then wholly away from the allegiance of his fathers. 
But Sauron caused to be built upon the hill in the midst of 
the city of the Numenoreans, Armenelos the Golden, a 
mighty temple; and it was in the form of a circle at the base, 
and there the walls were fifty feet in thickness, and the width 
of the base was five hundred feet across the centre, and 
the walls rose from the ground five hundred feet, and they 
were crowned with a mighty dome. And that dome was 
roofed all with silver, and rose glittering in the sun, so that 
the light of it could be seen afar off; but soon the light was 
darkened, and the silver became black. For there was an 
altar of fire in the midst of the temple, and in the topmost of 
the dome there was a louver, whence there issued a great 
smoke. And the first fire upon the altar Sauron kindled with 
the hewn wood of Nimloth, and it crackled and was 
consumed; but men marvelled at the reek that went up from 
it, so that the land lay under a cloud for seven days, until 
slowly it passed into the west. 

Thereafter the fire and smoke went up without ceasing; 
for the power of Sauron daily increased, and in that temple, 
with spilling of blood and torment and great wickedness, 
men made sacrifice to Melkor that he should release them 
from Death. And most often from among the Faithful they 
chose their victims; yet never openly on the charge that they 
would not worship Melkor, the Giver of Freedom, rather 
was cause sought against them that they hated the King 
and were his rebels, or that they plotted against their kin, 
devising lies and poisons. These charges were for the 
most part false; yet those were bitter days, and hate brings 
forth hate. 

But for all this Death did not depart from the land, 
rather it came sooner and more often, and in many dreadful 
guises. For whereas aforetime men had grown slowly old, 
and had laid them down in the end to sleep, when they were 



weary at last of the world, now madness and sickness 
assailed them; and yet they were afraid to die and go out 
into the dark, the realm of the lord that they had taken; and 
they cursed themselves in their agony. And men took 
weapons in those days and slew one another for little 
cause; for they were become quick to anger, and Sauron, 
or those whom he had bound to himself, went about the 
land setting man against man, so that the people murmured 
against the King and the lords, or against any that had 
aught that they had not; and the men of power took cruel 
revenge. 

Nonetheless for long it seemed to the Numenoreans 
that they prospered, and if they were not increased in 
happiness, yet they grew more strong, and their rich men 
ever richer. For with the aid and counsel of Sauron they 
multiplied then: possessions, and they devised engines, 
and they built ever greater ships. And they sailed now with 
power and armoury to Middle-earth, and they came no 
longer as bringers of gifts, nor even as rulers, but as fierce 
men of war. And they hunted the men of Middle-earth and 
took their goods and enslaved them, and many they slew 
cruelly upon their altars. For they built in their fortresses 
temples and great tombs in those days; and men feared 
them, and the memory of the kindly kings of the ancient 
days faded from the world and was darkened by many a 
tale of dread. 

Thus Ar-Pharazon, King of the Land of the Star, grew 
to the mightiest tyrant that had yet been in the world since 
the reign of Morgoth, though in truth Sauron ruled all from 
behind the throne. But the years passed, and the King felt 
the shadow of death approach, as his days lengthened; 
and he was filled with fear and wrath. Now came the hour 
that Sauron had prepared and long had awaited. And 
Sauron spoke to the King, saying that his strength was now 
so great that he might think to have his will in all things, and 
be subject to no command or ban. 

And he said: The Valar have possessed themselves 
of the land where there is no death; and they lie to you 
concerning it, hiding it as best they may, because of their 
avarice, and their fear lest the Kings of Men should wrest 
from them the deathless realm and rule the world in their 
stead. And though, doubtless, the gift of life unending is not 



for all, but only for such as are worthy, being men of might 
and pride and great lineage, yet against all Justice is it 
done that this gift, which is his due, should be withheld from 
the King of Bangs, Ar-Pharazon, mightiest of the sons of 
Earth, to whom Manwe alone can be compared, if even he. 
But great kings do not brook denials, and take what is their 
due.' 

Then Ar-Pharazon, being besotted, and walking under 
the shadow of death, for his span was drawing towards its 
end, hearkened to Sauron; and he began to ponder in his 
heart how he might make war upon the Valar. He was long 
preparing this design, and he spoke not openly of it, yet it 
could not be hidden from all. And Amandil, becoming 
aware of the purposes of the King, was dismayed and filled 
with a great dread, for he knew that Men could not vanquish 
the Valar in war, and that ruin must come upon the world, if 
this war were not stayed. Therefore he called his son, 
Elendil, and he said to him: 

The days are dark, and there is no hope for Men, for 
the Faithful are few. Therefore I am minded to try that 
counsel which our forefather Earendil took of old, to sail into 
the West, be there ban or no, and to speak to the Valar, 
even to Manwe himself, if may be, and beseech his aid ere 
all is lost.' 

'Would you then betray the King?' said Elendil. 'For you 
know well the charge that they make against us, that we are 
traitors and spies, and that until this day it has been false.' 

'If I thought that Manwe needed such a messenger,' 
said Amandil, I would betray the King. For there is but one 
loyalty from which no man can be absolved in heart for any 
cause. But it is for mercy upon Men and their deliverance 
from Sauron the Deceiver that I would plead, since some at 
least have remained faithful. And as for the Ban, I will suffer 
in myself the penalty, lest all my people should become 
guilty.' 

'But what think you, my father, is like to befall those of 
your house whom you leave behind, when your deed 
becomes known?' 

'It must not become known,' said Amandil. 'I will 
prepare my going in secret, and I will set sail into the east, 
whither daily the ships depart from our havens; and 
thereafter, as wind and chance may allow, I will go about, 



through south or north, back into the west, and seek what I 
may find. But for you and your folk, my son, I counsel that 
you should prepare yourselves other ships, and put aboard 
all such things as your hearts cannot bear to part with; and 
when the ships are ready, you should lie in the haven of 
Romenna, and give out among men that you purpose, when 
you see your time, to follow me into the east. Amandil is no 
longer so dear to our kinsman upon the throne that he will 
grieve over much, if we seek to depart, for a season or for 
good. But let it not be seen that you intend to take many 
men, or he will be troubled, because of the war that he now 
plots, for which he will need all the force that he may gather. 
Seek out the Faithful that are known still to be true, and let 
them join you in secret, if they are willing to go with you, and 
share in your design.' 

'And what shall that design be?' said Elendil. 

'To meddle not in the war, and to watch,' answered 
Amandil. 'Until I return I can say no more. But it is most like 
that you shall fly from the Land of the Star with no star to 
guide you; for that land is defiled. Then you shall lose all that 
you have loved, foretasting death in life, seeking a land of 
exile elsewhere. But east or west the Valar alone can say.' 

Then Amandil said farewell to all his household, as one 
that is about to die. 'For,' said he, 'it may well prove that you 
will see me never again; and that I shall show you no such 
sign as Earendil showed long ago. But hold you ever in 
readiness, for the end of the world that we have known is 
now at hand.' 

It is said that Amandil set sail in a small ship at night, 
and steered first eastward, and then went about and 
passed into the west. And he took with him three servants, 
dear to his heart, and never again were they heard of by 
word or sign in this world, nor is there any tale or guess of 
their fate. Men could not a second time be saved by any 
such embassy, and for the treason of Numenor there was 
no easy absolving. 

But Elendil did all that his father had bidden, and his 
ships lay off the east coast of the land; and the Faithful put 
aboard their wives and their children, and their heirlooms, 
and great store of goods. Many things there were of beauty 
and power, such as the Numenoreans had contrived in the 
days of their wisdom, vessels and jewels, and scrolls of lore 



written in scarlet and black. And Seven Stones they had, 
the gift of the Eldar; but in the ship of Isildur was guarded 
the young tree, the scion of Nimloth the Fair. Thus Elendil 
held himself in readiness, and did not meddle in the evil 
deeds of those days; and ever he looked for a sign that did 
not come. Then he journeyed in secret to the western 
shores and gazed out over the sea, for sorrow and yearning 
were upon him, and he greatly loved his father. But naught 
could he descry save the fleets of Ar-Pharazon gathering in 
the havens of the west. 

Now aforetime in the isle of Numenor the weather was 
ever apt to the needs and liking of Men: rain in due season 
and ever in measure; and sunshine, now warmer, now 
cooler, and winds from the sea. And when the wind was in 
the west, it seemed to many that it was filled with a 
fragrance, fleeting but sweet, heart-stirring, as of flowers 
that bloom for ever in undying meads and have no names 
on mortal shores. But all this was now changed; for the sky 
itself was darkened, and there were storms of rain and hail 
in those days, and violent winds; and ever and anon a great 
ship of the Numenoreans would founder and return not to 
haven, though such a grief had not till then befallen them 
since the rising of the Star. And out of the west there would 
come at times a great cloud in the evening, shaped as it 
were an eagle, with pinions spread to the north and the 
south; and slowly it would loom up, blotting out the sunset, 
and then uttermost night would fall upon Numenor. And 
some of the eagles bore lightning beneath their wings, and 
thunder echoed between sea and cloud. 

Then men grew afraid. 'Behold the Eagles of the Lords 
of the West!' they cried. 'The Eagles of Manwe are come 
upon Numenor!' And they fell upon their faces. 

Then some few would repent for a season, but others 
hardened their hearts, and they shook their fists at heaven, 
saying: 'The Lords of the West have plotted against us. 
They strike first. The next blow shall be ours!' These words 
the King himself spoke, but they were devised bySauron. 

Now the lightnings increased and slew men upon the 
hills, and in the fields, and in the streets of the city; and a 
fiery bolt smote the dome of the Temple and shore it 
asunder, and it was wreathed in flame. But the Temple itself 
was unshaken, and Sauron stood there upon the pinnacle 



and defied the lightning and was unharmed; and in that hour 
men called him a god and did all that he would. When 
therefore the last portent came they heeded it little. For the 
land shook under them, and a groaning as of thunder 
underground was mingled with the roaring of the sea, and 
smoke issued from the peak of the Meneltarma. But all the 




In that time the fleets of the Numenoreans darkened 
the sea upon the west of the land, and they were like an 
archipelago of a thousand isles; their masts were as a 
forest upon the mountains, and their sails like a brooding 
cloud; and their banners were golden and black. And all 
things waited upon the word of Ar-Pharazon; and Sauron 
withdrew into the inmost circle of the Temple, and men 
brought him victims to be burned. 

Then the Eagles of the Lords of the West came up out 
of the dayfall, and they were arrayed as for battle, 
advancing in a line the end of which diminished beyond 
sight; and as they came their wings spread ever wider, 
grasping the sky. But the West burned red behind them, 
and they glowed beneath, as though they were lit with a 
flame of great anger, so that all Numenor was illumined as 
with a smouldering fire; and men looked upon the faces of 
their fellows, and it seemed to them that they were red with 
wrath. 

Then Ar-Pharazon hardened his heart, and he went 
aboard his mighty ship, Alcarondas, Castle of the Sea. 
Many-oared it was and many-masted, golden and sable; 
and upon it the throne of Ar-Pharazon was set. Then he did 
on his panoply and his crown, and let raise his standard, 
and he gave the signal for the raising of the anchors; and in 
that hour the trumpets of Numenor outrang the thunder. 

Thus the fleets of the Numenoreans moved against the 
menace of the West; and there was little wind, but they had 
many oars and many strong slaves to row beneath the lash. 
The sun went down, and there came a great silence. 
Darkness fell upon the land, and the sea was still, while the 
world waited for what should betide. Slowly the fleets 
passed out of the sight of the watchers in the havens, and 
their lights faded, and night took them; and in the morning 
they were gone. For a wind arose in the east and it wafted 


them away; and they broke the Ban of the Valar, and sailed 
into forbidden seas, going up with war against the 
Deathless, to wrest from them everlasting life within the 
Circles of the World. 

But the fleets of Ar-Pharazon came up out of the deeps 
of the sea and encompassed Avallone and all the isle of 
Eressea, and the Eldar mourned, for the light of the setting 
sun was cut off by the cloud of the Numenoreans. And at 
last Ar-Pharazon came even to Aman, the Blessed Realm, 
and the coasts of Valinor; and still all was silent, and doom 
hung by a thread. For Ar-Pharazon wavered at the end, and 
almost he turned back. His heart misgave him when he 
looked upon the soundless shores and saw Taniquetil 
shining, whiter than snow, colder than death, silent, 
immutable, terrible as the shadow of the light of lluvatar. But 
pride was now his master, and at last he left his ship and 
strode upon the shore, claiming the land for his own, if none 
should do battle for it. And a host of the Numenoreans 
encamped in might about Tuna, whence all the Eldar had 
fled. 

Then Manwe upon the Mountain called upon lluvatar, 
and for that time the Valar laid down their government of 
Arda. But lluvatar showed forth his power, and he changed 
the fashion of the world; and a great chasm opened in the 
sea between Numenor and the Deathless Lands, and the 
waters flowed down into it, and the noise and smoke of the 
cataracts went up to heaven, and the world was shaken. 
And all the fleets of the Numenoreans were drawn down 
into the abyss, and they were drowned and swallowed up 
for ever. But Ar-Pharazon the King and the mortal warriors 
that had set foot upon the land of Aman were buried under 
falling hills: there it is said that they lie imprisoned in the 
Caves of the Forgotten, until the Last Battle and the Day of 
Doom. 

But the land of Aman and Eressea of the Eldar were 
taken away and removed beyond the reach of Men for ever. 
And Andor, the Land of Gift, Numenor of the Kings, Elenna 
of the Star of Earendil, was utterly destroyed. For it was 
nigh to the east of the great rift, and its foundations were 
overturned, and it fell and went down into darkness, and is 
no more. And there is not now upon Earth any place 



abiding where the memory of a time without evil is 
preserved. For lluvatar cast back the Great Seas west of 
Middle-earth, and the Empty Lands east of it, and new 
lands and new seas were made; and the world was 
diminished, for Valinor and Eressea were taken from it into 
the realm of hidden things. 

In an hour unlocked for by Men this doom befell, on the 
nine and thirtieth day since the passing of the fleets. Then 
suddenly fire burst from the Meneltarma, and there came a 
mighty wind and a tumult of the earth, and the sky reeled, 
and the hills slid, and Numenor went down into the sea, with 
all its children and its wives and its maidens and its ladies 
proud; and all its gardens and its halls and its towers, its 
tombs and its riches, and its jewels and its webs and its 
things painted and carven, and its lore: they vanished for 
ever. And last of all the mounting wave, green and cold and 
plumed with foam, climbing over the land, took to its bosom 
Tar-Miriel the Queen, fairer than silver or ivory or pearls. 
Too late she strove to ascend the steep ways of the 
Meneltarma to the holy place; for the waters overtook her, 




But whether or no it were that Amandil came indeed to 
Valinor and Manwe hearkened to his prayer, by grace of 
the Valar Elendil and his sons and their people were 
spared from the ruin of that day. For Elendil had remained 
in Romenna, refusing the summons of the King when he set 
forth to war; and avoiding the soldiers of Sauron that came 
to seize him and drag him to the fires of the Temple, he 
went aboard his ship and stood off from the shore, waiting 
on the time. There he was protected by the land from the 
great draught of the sea that drew all towards the abyss, 
and afterwards he was sheltered from the first fury of the 
storm. But when the devouring wave rolled over the land 
and Numenor toppled to its fall, then he would have been 
overwhelmed and would have deemed it the lesser grief to 
perish, for no wrench of death could be more bitter than the 
loss and agony of that day; but the great wind took him, 
wilder than any wind that Men had known, roaring from the 
west, and it swept his ships far away; and it rent their sails 
and snapped their masts, hunting the unhappy men like 
straws upon the water. 

Nine ships there were: four for Elendil, and for Isildur 
three, and for Anarion two; and they fled before the black 
gale out of the twilight of doom into the darkness of the 
world. And the deeps rose beneath them in towering anger, 
and waves like unto mountains moving with great caps of 
writhen snow bore them up amid the wreckage of the 
clouds, and after many days cast them away upon the 
shores of Middle-earth. And all the coasts and seaward 
regions of the western world suffered great change and ruin 
in that time; for the seas invaded the lands, and shores 
foundered, and ancient isles were drowned, and new isles 
were uplifted; and hills crumbled and rivers were turned into 
strange courses. 

Elendil and his sons after founded kingdoms in 
Middle-earth; and though their lore and craft was but an 
echo of that which had been ere Sauron came to Numenor, 
yet very great it seemed to the wild men of the world. And 
much is said in other lore of the deeds of the heirs of 
Elendil in the age that came after, and of their strife with 
Sauron that not yet was ended. 

For Sauron himself was filled with great fear at the 



wrath of the Valar, and the doom that Eru laid upon sea and 
land. It was greater far than aught he had looked for, hoping 
only for the death of the Numenoreans and the defeat of 
their proud king. And Sauron, sitting in his black seat in the 
midst of the Temple, had laughed when he heard the 
trumpets of Ar-Pharazon sounding for battle; and again he 
had laughed when he heard the thunder of the storm; and a 
third time, even as he laughed at his own thought, thinking 
what he would do now in the world, being rid of the Edain 
for ever, he was taken in the midst of his mirth, and his seat 
and his temple fell into the abyss. But Sauron was not of 
mortal flesh, and though he was robbed now of that shape 
in which he had wrought so great an evil, so that he could 
never again appear fair to the eyes of Men, yet his spirit 
arose out of the deep and passed as a shadow and a 
black wind over the sea, and came back to Middle-earth 
and to Mordor that was his home. There he took up again 
his great Ring in Barad-dur, and dwelt there, dark and 
silent, until he wrought himself a new guise, an image of 
malice and hatred made visible; and the Eye of Sauron the 
Terrible few could endure. 

But these things come not into the tale of the Drowning 
of Numenor, of which now all is told. And even the name of 
that land perished, and Men spoke thereafter not of Elenna, 
nor of Andor the Gift that was taken away, nor of Numenore 
on the confines of the world; but the exiles on the shores of 
the sea, if they turned towards the West in the desire of 
their hearts, spoke of Mar-nu-Falmar that was whelmed in 
the waves, Akallabeth the Downfallen, Atalante in the 



Among the Exiles many believed that the summit of the 
Meneltarma, the Pillar of Heaven, was not drowned for 
ever, but rose again above the waves, a lonely island lost in 
the great waters; for it had been a hallowed place, and 
even in the days of Sauron none had defiled it And some 
there were of the seed of Earendil that afterwards sought 
for it, because it was said among loremasters that the far- 
sighted men of old could see from the Meneltarma a 



glimmer of the Deathless Land. For even after the ruin the 
hearts of the Dunedain were still set westwards; and though 
they knew indeed that the world was changed, they said: 
'Avallone is vanished from the Earth and the Land of Aman 
is taken away, and in the world of this present darkness 
they cannot be found. Yet once they were, and therefore 
they still are, in true being and in the whole shape of the 
world as at first it was devised.' 

For the Dunedain held that even mortal Men, if so 
blessed, might look upon other times than those of their 
bodies' life; and they longed ever to escape from the 
shadows of their exile and to see in some fashion fee light 
that dies not; for the sorrow of the thought of death had 
pursued them over the deeps of the sea. Thus it was that 
great mariners among them would still search the empty 
seas, hoping to come upon the Isle of Meneltarma, and 
there to see a vision of things that were. But they found it 
not. And those that sailed far came only to the new lands, 
and found them like to the old lands, and subject to death. 
And those that sailed furthest set but a girdle about the 
Earth and returned weary at last to the place of their 
beginning; and they said: 

'All roads are now bent.' 

Thus in after days, what by the voyages of ships, what 
by lore and star-craft, the kings of Men knew that the world 
was indeed made round, and yet the Eldar were permitted 
still to depart and to come to the Ancient West and to 
Avallone, if they would. Therefore the loremasters of Men 
said that a Straight Road must still be, for those that were 
permitted to find it. And they taught that, while the new world 
fell away, the old road and the path of the memory of the 
West still went on, as it were a mighty bridge invisible that 
passed through the air of breath and of flight (which were 
bent now as the world was bent), and traversed Ilmen which 
flesh unaided cannot endure, until it came to Tol Eressea, 
the Lonely Isle, and maybe even beyond, to Valinor, where 
the Valar still dwell and watch the unfolding of the story of 
the world. And tales and rumours arose along the shores of 
the sea concerning mariners and men forlorn upon the 
water who, by some fate or grace or favour of the Valar, 
had entered in upon the Straight Way and seen the face of 
the world sink below them, and so had come to the lamplit 



quays of Avallone, or verily to the last beaches on the 
margin of Aman, and there had looked upon the White 
Mountain, dreadful and beautiful, before they died. 


