
OF THE RINGS OF POWER 
AND THE THIRD AGE 



in which these tales come to their end 

Of old there was Sauron the Maia, whom the Sindar in 
Beleriand named Gorthaur. In the beginning ofArda Melkor 
seduced him to his allegiance, and he became the greatest 
and most trusted of the servants of the Enemy, and the 
most perilous, for he could assume many forms, and for 
long if he willed he could still appear noble and beautiful, so 
as to deceive all but the most wary. 

When Thangorodrim was broken and Morgoth 
overthrown, Sauron put on his fair hue again and did 
obeisance to Eonwe the herald of Manwe, and abjured all 
his evil deeds. And some hold that this was not at first 
falsely done, but that Sauron in truth repented, if only out of 
fear, being dismayed by the fall of Morgoth and the great 
wrath of the Lords of the West. But it was not within the 
power of Eonwe to pardon those of his own order, and he 
commanded Sauron to return to Aman and there receive 
the judgement of Manwe. Then Sauron was ashamed, and 
he was unwilling to return in humiliation and to receive from 
the Valar a sentence, it might be, of long servitude in proof 
of his good faith; for under Morgoth his power had been 
great. Therefore when Eonwe departed he hid himself in 
Middle-earth; and he fell back into evil, for the bonds that 
Morgoth bad laid upon him were very strong. 


In the Great Battle and the tumults of the fall of 
Thangorodrim there were mighty convulsions in the earth, 
and Beleriand was broken and laid waste; and northward 
and westward many lands sank beneath the waters of the 
Great Sea. In the east, in Ossiriand, the walls of Ered Luin 
were broken, and a great gap was made in them towards 
the south, and a gulf of the sea flowed in. Into that gulf the 
River Lhun fell bv a new course, and it was called therefore 



the Gulf of Lhun. That country had of old been named 
Lindon by the Noldor, and this name it bore thereafter; and 
many of the Eldar still dwelt there, lingering, unwilling yet to 
forsake Beleriand where they had fought and laboured 
long. Gil-galad son of Fingon was their king, and with him 
was Elrond Half-elven, son of Earendil the Mariner and 
brother of Elros first king of Numenor. 

Upon the shores of the Gulf of Lhun the Elves built their 
havens, and named them Mithlond; and there they held 
many ships, for the harbourage was good. From the Grey 
Havens the Eldar ever and anon set sail, fleeing from the 
darkness of the days of Earth; for by the mercy of the Valar 
the Firstborn could still follow the Straight Road and return, 
if they would, to their kindred in Eressea and Valinor 
beyond the encircling seas. 

Others of the Eldar there were who crossed the 
mountains of Ered Luin in that age and passed into the 
inner lands. Many of these were Teleri, survivors of Doriath 
and Ossiriand; and they established realms among the 
Silvan Elves in woods and mountains far from the sea, for 
which nonetheless they ever yearned in their hearts. Only in 
Eregion, which Men called Hollin, did Elves of Noldorin 
race establish a lasting realm beyond the Ered Luin. 
Eregion was nigh to the great mansions of the Dwarves 
that were named Khazad-dum, but by the Elves 
Hadhodrond, and afterwards Moria. From Ost-in-Edhil, the 
city of the Elves, the highroad ran to the west gate of 
Khazad-dum, for a friendship arose between Dwarves and 
Elves, such as has never elsewhere been, to the 
enrichment of both those peoples. In Eregion the craftsmen 
of the Gwaith-i-Mirdain, the People of the Jewel-smiths, 
surpassed in cunning all that have ever wrought, save only 
Feanor himself; and indeed greatest in skill among them 
was Celebrimbor, son of Curufin, who was estranged from 
his father and remained in Nargothrond when Celegorm 
and Curufin were driven forth, as is told in the Quenta 
Silmarillion. 

Elsewhere in Middle-earth there was peace for many 
years; yet the lands were for the most part savage and 
desolate, save only where the people of Beleriand came. 
Many Elves dwelt there indeed, as they had dwelt through 



the countless years, wandering free in the wide lands far 
from the Sea; but they were Avari, to whom the deeds of 
Beleriand were but a rumour and Valinor only a distant 
name. And in the south and in the further east Men 
multiplied; and most of them turned to evil, for Sauron was 
at work. 

Seeing the desolation of the world, Sauron said in his 
heart that the Valar, having overthrown Morgoth, had again 
forgotten Middle-earth; and his pride grew apace. He 
looked with hatred on the Eldar, and he feared the Men of 
Numenor who came back at whiles in their ships to the 
shores of Middle-earth; but for long he dissembled his mind 
and concealed the dark designs that he shaped in his 
heart. 

Men he found the easiest to sway of all the peoples of 
the Earth; but long he sought to persuade the Elves to his 
service, for he knew that the Firstborn had the greater 
power; and he went far and wide among them, and his hue 
was still that of one both fair and wise. Only to Lindon he 
did not come, for Gil-galad and Elrond doubted him and his 
fair-seeming, and though they knew not who in truth he was 
they would not admit him to that land. But elsewhere the 
Elves received him gladly, and few among them hearkened 
to the messengers from Lindon bidding them beware; for 
Sauron took to himself the name of Annatar, the Lord of 
Gifts, and they had at first much profit from his friendship. 
And he said to them: "Alas, for the weakness of the great! 
For a mighty king is Gil-galad, and wise in all lore is Master 
Elrond, and yet they will not aid me in my labours. Can it be 
that they do not desire to see other lands become as 
blissful as their own? But wherefore should Middle-earth 
remain for ever desolate and dark, whereas the Elves could 
make it as fair as Eressea, nay even as Valinor? And since 
you have not returned thither, as you might, I perceive that 
you love this Middle-earth, as do I. Is it not then our task to 
labour together for its enrichment, and for the raising of all 
the Elven-kindreds that wander here untaught to the height 
of that power and knowledge which those have who are 
beyond the Sea?' 

It was in Eregion that the counsels of Sauron were 
most gladly received, for in that land the Noldor desired 
ever to increase the skill and subtlety of their works. 



Moreover they were not at peace in their hearts, since they 
had refused to return into the West, and they desired both 
to stay in Middle-earth, which indeed they loved, and yet to 
enjoy the bliss of those that had departed. Therefore they 
hearkened to Sauron, and they learned of him many things, 
for his knowledge was great. In those days the smiths of 
Ost-in-Edhil surpassed all that they had contrived before; 
and they took thought, and they made Rings of Power. But 
Sauron guided their labours, and he was aware of all that 
they did; for his desire was to set a bond upon the Elves 
and to bring them under his vigilance. 

Now the Elves made many rings; but secretly Sauron 
made One Ring to rule all the others, and their power was 
bound up with it, to be subject wholly to it and to last only so 
long as it too should last. And much of the strength and will 
of Sauron passed into that One Ring; for the power of the 
Elverwings was very great, and that which should govern 
them must be a thing of surpassing potency; and Sauron 
forged it in the Mountain of Fire in the Land of Shadow. And 
while he wore the One Ring he could perceive all the things 
that were done by means of the lesser rings, and he could 



But the Elves were not so lightly to be caught. As soon 
as Sauron set the One Ring upon his finger they were 
aware of him; and they knew him, and perceived that he 
would be master of them, and of an that they wrought. Then 
in anger and fear they took off their rings. But he, finding 
that he was betrayed and that the Elves were not deceived, 
was filled with wrath; and he came against them with open 
war, demanding that all the rings should be delivered to 
him, since the Elven-smiths could not have attained to their 
making without his lore and counsel. But the Elves fled from 
him; and three of their rings they saved, and bore them 
away, and hid them. 

Now these were the Three that had last been made, 
and they possessed the greatest powers. Narya, Nenya, 
and Vilya, they were named, the Rings of Fire, and of 
Water, and of Air, set with ruby and adamant and sapphire; 
and of all the Elven-rings Sauron most desired to possess 
them, for those who had them in their keeping could ward 
off the decays of time and postpone the weariness of the 


world. But Sauron could not discover them, for they were 
given into the hands of the Wise, who concealed them and 
never again used them openly while Sauron kept the Ruling 
Ring. Therefore the Three remained unsullied, for they were 
forged by Celebrimbor alone, and the hand of Sauron had 
never touched them; yet they also were subject to the One. 

From that time war never ceased between Sauron and 
the Elves; and Eregion was laid waste, and Celebrimbor 
slain, and the doors of Moria were shut. In that time the 
stronghold and refuge of Imladris, that Men called Rivendell, 
was founded by Elrond Half-elven; and long it endured. But 
Sauron gathered into his hands all the remaining Rings of 
Power; and he dealt them out to the other peoples of 
Middle-earth, hoping thus to bring under his sway all those 
that desired secret power beyond the measure of their 
kind. Seven Rings he gave to the Dwarves; but to Men he 
gave nine, for Men proved in this matter as in others the 
readiest to his will. And all those rings that he governed he 
perverted, the more easily since he had a part in their 
making, and they were accursed, and they betrayed in the 
end all those that used them. The Dwarves indeed proved 
tough and hard to tame; they ill endure the domination of 
others, and the thoughts of their hearts are hard to fathom, 
nor can they be turned to shadows. They used their rings 
only for the getting of wealth; but wrath and an over- 
mastering greed of gold were kindled in their hearts, of 
which evil enough after came to the profit of Sauron. It is 
said that the foundation of each of the Seven Hoards of the 
Dwarf-kings of old was a golden ring; but all those hoards 
long ago were plundered and the Dragons devoured them, 
and of the Seven Rings some were consumed in fire and 
some Sauron recovered. 

Men proved easier to ensnare. Those who used the 
Nine Rings became mighty in their day, kings, sorcerers, 
and warriors of old. They obtained glory and great wealth, 
yet it turned to their undoing. They had, as it seemed, 
unending life, yet life became unendurable to them. They 
could walk, if they would, unseen by all eyes in this world 
beneath the sun, and they could see things in worlds 
invisible to mortal men; but too often they beheld only the 
phantoms and delusions of Sauron. And one by one, 
sooner or later, according to their native strength and to the 



good or evil of their wills in the beginning, they fell under the 
thraldom of the ring that they bore and under the domination 
of the One, which was Sauron's. And they became for ever 
invisible save to him that wore the Ruling Ring, and they 
entered into the realm of shadows. The Nazgul were they, 
the Ringwraiths, the Enemy's most terrible servants; 
darkness went with them, and they cried with the voices of 
death. 

Now Sauron's lust and pride increased, until he knew 
no bounds, and he determined to make himself master of 
all things in Middle-earth, and to destroy the Elves, and to 
compass, if he might, the downfall of Numenor. He brooked 
no freedom nor any rivalry, and he named himself Lord of 
the Earth. A mask he still could wear so that if he wished he 
might deceive the eyes of Men, seeming to them wise and 
fair. But he ruled rather by force and fear, if they might avail; 
and those who perceived his shadow spreading over the 
world called him the Dark Lord and named him the Enemy; 
and he gathered again under his government all the evil 
things of the days of Morgoth that remained on earth or 
beneath it, and the Ores were at his command and 
multiplied like flies. Thus the Black Years began, which the 
Elves call the Days of Flight. In that time many of the Elves 
of Middle-earth fled to Lindon and thence over the seas 
never to return; and many were destroyed by Sauron and 
his servants. But in Lindon Gil-galad still maintained his 
power, and Sauron dared not as yet to pass the Mountains 
of Ered Luin nor to assail the Havens; and Gil-galad was 
aided by the Numenoreans. Elsewhere Sauron reigned, 
and those who would be free took refuge in the fastnesses 
of wood and mountain, and ever fear pursued them. In the 
east and south well nigh all Men were under his dominion, 
and they grew strong in those days and built many towns 
and walls of stone, and they were numerous and fierce in 
war and aimed with iron. To them Sauron was both king 
and god; and they feared him exceedingly, for he 
surrounded his abode with fire. 

Yet there came at length a stay in the onslaught of 
Sauron upon the westlands. For, as is told in tile 
Akallabeth, he was challenged by the might of Numenor. 
So great was the power and splendour of the 
Numenoreans in the noontide of their realm that the 



servants of Sauron would not withstand them, and hoping to 
accomplish by cunning what he could not achieve by force, 
he left Middle-earth for a while and went to Numenor as a 
hostage of Tar-Calion the King. And there he abode, until at 
the last by his craft he had corrupted the hearts of most of 
that people, and set them at war with the Valar, and so 
compassed their ruin, as he had long desired. But that ruin 
was more terrible than Sauron had foreseen, for he had 
forgotten the might of the Lords of the West in their anger. 
The world was broken, and the land was swallowed up, and 
the seas rose over it, and Sauron himself went down into 
the abyss. But his spirit arose and fled back on a dark wind 
to Middle-earth, seeking a home. There he found that the 
power of Gil-galad had grown great in the years of his 
absence, and it was spread now over wide regions of the 
north and west, and had passed beyond the Misty 
Mountains and the Great River even to the borders of 
Greenwood the Great, and was drawing nigh to the strong 
places where once he had dwelt secure. Then Sauron 
withdrew to his fortress in the Black Land and meditated 
war. 

In that time those of the Numenoreans who were saved 
from destruction fled eastward, as is told in the Akallabeth. 
The chief of these were Elendil the Tall and his sons, Isildur 
and Anarion. Kinsmen of the King they were, descendants 
of Elros, but they had been unwilling to listen to Sauron, and 
had refused to make war on the Lords of the West. 
Manning their ships with all who remained faithful they 
forsook the land of Numenor ere ruin came upon it. They 
were mighty men and their ships were strong and tall, but 
the tempests overtook them, and they were borne aloft on 
hills of water even to the clouds, and they descended upon 
Middle-earth like birds of the storm. 

Elendil was cast up by the waves in the land of Lindon, 
and he was befriended by Gil-galad. Thence he passed up 
the River Lhun, and beyond Ered Luin he established his 
realm, and his people dwelt in many places in Eriador 
about the courses of the Lhun and the Baranduin; but his 
chief city was at Annuminas beside the water of Lake 
Nenuial. At Fornost upon the North Downs also the 
Numenoreans dwelt, and in Cardolan, and in the hills of 
Rhudaur; and towers they raised upon Emyn Beraid and 



upon Amon Sul; and there remain many barrows and ruined 
works in those places, but the towers of Emyn Beraid still 
look towards the sea. 

Isildur and Anarion were borne away southwards, and 
at the last they brought their ships up the Great River 
Anduin, that flows out of Rhovanion into the western sea in 
the Bay of Belfalas; and they established a realm in those 
lands that were after called Gondor, whereas the Northern 
Kingdom was named Arnor. Long before in the days of 
their power the mariners of Numenor had established a 
haven and strong places about the mouths of Anduin, in 
despite of Sauron in the Black Land that lay nigh upon the 
east. In the later days to this haven came only the Faithful of 
Numenor, and many therefore of the folk of the coastlands 
in that region were in whole or in part akin to the Elf-friends 
and the people of Elendil, and they welcomed his sons. The 
chief city of this southern realm was Osgiliath, through the 
midst of which the Great River flowed; and the 
Numenoreans built there a great bridge, upon which there 
were towers and houses of stone wonderful to behold, and 
tall ships came up out of the sea to the quays of the city. 
Other strong places they built also upon either hand: Minas 
Ithil, the Tower of the Rising Moon, eastward upon a 
shoulder of the Mountains of Shadow as a threat to Mordor; 
and to the westward Minas Anor, the Tower of the Setting 
Sun, at the feet of Mount Mindolluin, as a shield against the 
wild men of the dales. In Minas Ithil was the house of Isildur, 
and in Minas Anor the house of Anarion, but they shared 
the realm between them and their thrones were set side by 
side in the Great Hall of Osgiliath. These were the chief 
dwellings of the Numenoreans in Gondor, but other works 
marvellous and strong they built in the land in the days of 
their power, at the Argonath, and at Aglarond, and at Erech; 
and in the circle of Angrenost, which Men called Isengard, 
they made the Pinnacle of Orthanc of unbreakable stone. 

Many treasures and great heirlooms of virtue and 
wonder the Exiles had brought from Numenor; and of these 
the most renowned were the Seven Stones and the White 
Tree. The White Tree was grown from the fruit of Nimloth 
the Fair that stood in the courts of the Bang at Armenelos in 
Numenor, ere Sauron burned it; and Nimloth was in its turn 
descended from the Tree of Tlrion, that was an image of 



the Eldest of Trees, White Telperion which Yavanna caused 
to grow in the land of the Valar. The Tree, memorial of the 
Eldar and of the light of Valinor, was planted in Minas Ithil 
before the house of Isildur, since he it was that had saved 
the fruit from destruction; but the Stones were divided. 

Three Elendil took, and his sons each two. Those of 
Elendil were set in towers upon Emyn Beraid, and upon 
Amon Sul, and in the city of Annuminas. But those of his 
sons were at Minas Ithil and Minas Anor, and at Orthanc 
and in Osgiliath. Now these Stones had this virtue that 
those who looked therein might perceive in them things far 
off, whether in place or in time. For the most part they 
revealed only things near to another kindred Stone, for the 
Stones each called to each; but those who possessed 
great strength of will and of mind might learn to direct their 
gaze whither they would. Thus the Numenoreans were 
aware of many things that their enemies wished to conceal, 
and little escaped their vigilance in the days of their might. 

It is said that the towers of Emyn Beraid were not built 
indeed by the Exiles of Numenor, but were raised by Gil- 
galad for Elendil, his friend; and the Seeing Stone of Emyn 
Beraid was set in Elostirion, the tallest of the towers. 
Thither Elendil would repair, and thence he would gaze out 
over the sundering seas, when the yearning of exile was 
upon him; and it is believed that thus he would at whiles see 
far away even the Tower of Avallone upon Eressea, where 
the Masterstone abode, and yet abides. These stones 
were gifts of the Eldar to Amandil, father of Elendil, for the 
comfort of the Faithful of Numenor in their dark days, when 
the Elves might come no longer to that land under the 
shadow of Sauron. They were called the Palantlri, those 
that watch from afar; but all those that were brought to 
Middle-earth long ago were lost. 

Thus the Exiles of Numenor established their realms in 
Amor and in Gondor; but ere many years had passed it 
became manifest that their enemy, Sauron, had also 
returned. He came in secret, as has been told, to his 
ancient kingdom of Mordor beyond the Ephel Duath, the 
Mountains of Shadow, and that country marched with 
Gondor upon the east. There above the valley of Gorgoroth 
was built his fortress vast and strong, Barad-dur, the Dark 



Tower; and there was a fiery mountain in that land that the 
Elves named Orodruin. Indeed for that reason Sauron had 
set there his dwelling long before, for he used the fire that 
welled there from the heart of the earth in his sorceries and 
in his forging; and in the midst of the Land of Mordor he had 
fashioned the Ruling Ring. There now he brooded in the 
dark, until he had wrought for himself a new shape; and it 
was terrible, for his fair semblance had departed for ever 
when he was cast into the abyss at the drowning of 
Numenor. He took up again the great Ring and clothed 
himself in power; and the malice of the Eye of Sauron few 
even of the great among Elves and Men could endure. 

Now Sauron prepared war against the Eldar and the 
Men of Westernesse, and the fires of the Mountain were 
wakened again. Wherefore seeing the smoke of Orodruin 
from afar, and perceiving that Sauron had returned, the 
Numenoreans named that mountain anew Amon Amarth, 
which is Mount Doom. And Sauron gathered to him great 
strength of his servants out of the east and the south; and 
among them were not a few of the high race of Numenor. 
For in the days of the sojourn of Sauron in that land the 
hearts of well nigh all its people had been turned towards 
darkness. Therefore many of those who sailed east in that 
time and made fortresses and dwellings upon the coasts 
were already bent to his will, and they served him still gladly 
in Middle-earth. But because of the power of Gil-galad 
these renegades, lords both mighty and evil, for the most 
part took up their abodes in the southlands far away; yet 
two there were, Herumor and Fuinur, who rose to power 
among the Haradrim, a great and cruel people that dwelt in 
the wide lands south of Mordor beyond the mouths of 
Anduin. 

When therefore Sauron saw his time he came with 
great force against the new realm of Gondor, and he took 
Minas Ithil, and he destroyed the White Tree of Isildur that 
grew there. But Isildur escaped, and taking with him a 
seedling of the Tree he went with his wife and his sons by 
ship down the River, and they sailed from the mouths of 
Anduin seeking Elendil. Meanwhile Anarion held Osgiliath 
against the Enemy, and for that time drove him back to the 
mountains; but Sauron gathered his strength again, and 
Anarion knew that unless help should come his kingdom 



would not long stand. 

Now Elendil and Gil-galad took counsel together, for 
they perceived that Sauron would grow too strong and 
would overcome all his enemies one by one, if they did not 
unite against him. Therefore they made that League which 
is called the Last Alliance, and they marched east into 
Middle-earth gathering a great host of Elves and Men; and 
they halted for a while at Imladris. It is said that the host that 
was there assembled was fairer and more splendid in arms 
than any that has since been seen in Middle-earth, and 
none greater has been mustered since the host of the Valar 
went against Thangorodrim. 

From Imladris they crossed the Misty Mountains by 
many passes and marched down the River Anduin, and so 
came at last upon the host of Sauron on Dagorlad, the 
Battle Plain, which lies before the gate of the Black Land. 
All living things were divided in that day, and some of every 
kind, even of beasts and birds, were found in either host, 
save the Elves only. They alone were undivided and 
followed Gil-galad. Of the Dwarves few fought upon either 
side; but the kindred of Durin of Moria fought against 
Sauron. 

The host of Gil-galad and Elendil had the victory, for 
the might of the Elves was still great in those days, and the 
Numenoreans were strong and tall, and terrible in their 
wrath. Against Aeglos the spear of Gil-galad none could 
stand; and the sword of Elendil filled Ores and Men with 
fear, for it shone with the light of the sun and of the moon, 
and it was named Narsil. 

Then Gil-galad and Elendil passed into Mordor and 
encompassed the stronghold of Sauron; and they laid 
siege to it for seven years, and suffered grievous loss by 
fire and by the darts and bolts of the Enemy, and Sauron 
sent many sorties against them. There in the valley of 
Gorgoroth Anarion son of Elendil was slain, and many 
others. But at the last the siege was so strait that Sauron 
himself came forth; and he wrestled with Gil-galad and 
Elendil, and they both were slain, and the sword of Elendil 
broke under him as he fell. But Sauron also was thrown 
down, and with the hilt-shard of Narsil Isildur cut the Ruling 
Ring from the hand of Sauron and took it for his own. Then 
Sauron was for that time vanquished, and he forsook his 



body, and his spirit fled far away and hid in waste places; 
and he took no visible shape again for many long years. 

Thus began the Third Age of the World, after the 
Eldest Days and the Black Years; and there was still hope 
in that time and the memory of mirth, and for long the White 
Tree of the Eldar flowered in the courts of the Kings of Men, 
for the seedling which he had saved Isildur planted in the 
citadel of Anor in memory of his brother, ere he departed 
from Gondor. The servants of Sauron were routed and 
dispersed, yet they were not wholly destroyed; and though 
many Men turned now from evil and became subject to the 
heirs of Elendil, yet many more remembered Sauron in 
their hearts and hated the kingdoms of the West. The Dark 
Tower was levelled to the ground, yet its foundations 
remained, and it was not forgotten. The Numenoreans 
indeed set a guard upon the land of Mordor, but none 
dared dwell there because of the terror of the memory of 
Sauron, and because of the Mountain of Fire that stood 
nigh to Barad-dur; and the valley of Gorgoroth was filled 
with ash. Many of the Elves and many of the Numenoreans 
and of Men who were their allies had perished in the Battle 
and the Siege; and Elendil the Tall and Gil-galad the High 
King were no more. Never again was such a host 
assembled, nor was there any such league of Elves and 
Men; for after Elendil’s day the two kindreds became 
estranged. 

The Ruling Ring passed out of the knowledge even of 
the Wise in that age; yet it was not unmade. For Isildur 
would not surrender it to Elrond and Cirdan who stood by. 
They counselled him to cast it into the fire of Orodruin nigh 
at hand, in which it had been forged, so that it should 
perish, and the power of Sauron be for ever diminished, 
and he should remain only as a shadow of malice in the 
wilderness. But Isildur refused this counsel, saying: This I 
will have as were-gild for my father's death, and my 
brothers. Was it not I that dealt the Enemy his death-blow?' 
And the Ring that he held seemed to him exceedingly fair to 
look on; and he would not suffer it to be destroyed. Taking it 
therefore he returned at first to Minas Anor, and there 
planted the White Tree in memory of his brother Anarion. 
But soon he departed, and after he had given counsel to 



Meneldil, his brother's son, and had committed to him the 
realm of the south, he bore away the Ring, to be an 
heirloom of his house, and marched north from Gondor by 
the way that Elendil had come; and he forsook the South 
Kingdom, for he purposed to take up his father's realm in 
Eriador, far from the shadow of the Black Land. 

But Isildur was overwhelmed by a host of Ores that lay 
in wait in the Misty Mountains; and they descended upon 
him at unawares in his camp between the Greenwood and 
the Great River, nigh to Loeg Ningloron, the Gladden 
Fields, for he was heedless and set no guard, deeming that 
all his foes were overthrown. There well nigh all his people 
were slain, and among them were his three elder sons, 
Elendur, Aratan, and Ciryon; but his wife and his youngest 
son, Valandil, he had left in Imladris when he went to the 
war. Isildur himself escaped by means of the Ring, for when 
he wore it he was invisible to all eyes; but the Ores hunted 
him by scent and slot, until he came to the River and 
plunged in. There the Ring betrayed him and avenged its 
maker, for it slipped from his finger as he swam, and it was 
lost in the water. Then the Ores saw him as he laboured in 
the stream, and they shot him with many arrows, and that 
was his end. Only three of his people came ever back over 
the mountains after long wandering; and of these one was 
Ohtar his esquire, to whose keeping he had given the 
shards of the sword of Elendil. 

Thus Narsil came in due time to the hand of Valandil, 
Isildur's heir, in Imladris; but the blade was broken and its 
light was extinguished, and it was not forged anew. And 
Master Elrond foretold that this would not be done until the 
Ruling Ring should be found again and Sauron should 
return; but the hope of Elves and Men was that these things 
might never come to pass. 

Valandil took up his abode in Annuminas, but his folk 
were diminished, and of the Numenoreans and of the Men 
of Eriador there remained now too few to people the land 
or to maintain all the places that Elendil had built; in 
Dagorlad, and in Mordor, and upon the Gladden Fields 
many had fallen. And it came to pass after the days of 
Earendur, the seventh king that followed Valandil, that the 
Men of Westernesse, the Dunedain of the North, became 
divided into petty realms and lordships, and their foes 



devoured them one by one. Ever they dwindled with the 
years, until their glory passed, leaving only green mounds in 
the grass. At length naught was left of them but a strange 
people wandering secretly in the wild, and other men knew 
not their homes nor the purpose of their journeys, and save 
in Imladris, in the house of Elrond, their ancestry was 
forgotten. Yet the shards of the sword were cherished 
during many lives of Men by the heirs of Isildur; and their 
line, from father to son, remained unbroken. 

In the south the realm of Gondor endured, and for a 
time its splendour grew, until it recalled the wealth and 
majesty of Numenor ere it fell High towers the people of 
Gondor built, and strong places, and havens of many ships; 
and the Winged Crown of the Kings of Men was held in 
awe by people of many lands and tongues. For many a 
year the White Tree grew before the King's house in Minas 
Anor, the seed of that tree which Isildur brought out of the 
deeps of the sea from Numenor; and the seed before that 
came from Avallone, and before that from Valinor in the 
Day before days when the world was young. 

Yet at the last, in the wearing of the swift years of 
Middle-earth, Gondor waned, and the line of Meneldil son 
of Anarion failed. For the blood of the Numenoreans 
became much mingled with that of other men, and their 
power and wisdom was diminished, and their life-span was 
shortened, and the watch upon Mordor slumbered. And in 
the days of Telemnar, the third and twentieth of the line of 
Meneldil, a plague came upon dark winds out of the east, 
and it smote the King and his children, and many of the 
people of Gondor perished. Then the forts on the borders of 
Mordor were deserted, and Minas Ithil was emptied of its 
people; and evil entered again into the Black Land secretly, 
and the ashes of Gorgoroth were stirred as by a cold wind, 
for dark shapes gathered there. It is said that these were 
indeed the Ulairi, whom Sauron called the Nazgul, the Nine 
Ringwraiths that had long remained hidden, but returned 
now to prepare the ways of their Master, for he had begun 
to grow again. 

And in the days of Eamil they made their first stroke, 
and they came by night out of Mordor over the passes of 
the Mountains of Shadow, and took Minas Ithil for their 
abode; and they made it a place of such dread that none 



dared to look upon it. Thereafter it was called Minas 
Morgul, the Tower of Sorcery; and Minas Morgul was ever 
at war with Minas Anor in the west. Then Osgiliath, which in 
the waning of the people had long been deserted, became 
a place of ruins and a city of ghosts. But Minas Anor 
endured, and it was named anew Minas Tirith, the Tower of 
Guard; for there the kings caused to be built in the citadel a 
white tower, very tall and fair, and its eye was upon many 
lands. Proud still and strong was that city, and in it the 
White Tree still flowered for a while before the house of the 
Kings; and there the remnant of the Numenoreans still 
defended the passage of the River against the terrors of 
Minas Morgul and against all the enemies of the West, 
Ores and monsters and evil Men; and thus the lands behind 
them, west of Anduin, were protected from war and 
destruction. 

Still Minas Tirith endured after the days of Earnur, son 
of Earnil, and the last King of Gondor. He it was that rode 
alone to the gates of Minas Morgul to meet the challenge of 
the Morgul-lord; and he met him in single combat, but he 
was betrayed by the Nazgul and taken alive into the city of 
torment, and no living man saw him ever again. Now Earnur 
left no heir, but when the line of the Kings failed the 
Stewards of the house of Mardil the Faithful ruled the city 
and its ever-shrinking realm; and the Rohirrim, the 
Horsemen of the North, came and dwelt in the green land of 
Rohan, which before was named Calenardhon and was a 
part of the kingdom of Condor; and the Rohirrim aided the 
Lords of the City in their wars. And northward, beyond the 
Falls of Rauros and the Gates of Argonath, there were as 
yet other defences, powers more ancient of which Men 
knew little, against whom the things of evil did not dare to 
move, until in the ripening of time their dark lord, Sauron, 
should come forth again. And until that time was come, 
never again after the days of Earnil did the Nazgul dare to 
cross the River or to come forth from their city in shape 
visible to Men. 

In all the days of the Third Age, after the fall of Gil- 
galad, Master Elrond abode in Imladris, and he gathered 
there many Elves, and other folk of wisdom and power from 
among all the kindreds of Middle-earth, and he preserved 



through many lives of Men the memory of all that had been 
fair; and the house of Elrond was a refuge for the weary and 
the oppressed, and a treasury of good counsel and wise 
lore. In that house were harboured the Heirs of Isildur, in 
childhood and old age, because of the kinship of their 
blood with Elrond himself, and because he knew in his 
wisdom that one should come of their line to whom a great 
part was appointed in the last deeds of that Age. And until 
that time came the shards of Elendil’s sword were given 
into the keeping of Elrond, when the days of the Dunedain 
darkened and they became a wandering people. 

In Eriador Imladris was the chief dwelling of the High 
Elves; but at the Grey Havens of Lindon there abode also a 
remnant of the people of Gil-galad the Elvenking. At times 
they would wander into the lands of Eriador, but for the 
most part they dwelt near the shores of the sea, building 
and tending the elven-ships wherein those of the Firstborn 
who grew weary of the world set sail into the uttermost 
West Cirdan the Shipwright was lord of the Havens and 
mighty among the Wise. 

Of the Three Rings that the Elves had preserved 
unsullied no open word was ever spoken among the Wise, 
and few even of the Eldar knew where they were bestowed. 
Yet after the fall of Sauron their power was ever at work, 
and where they abode there mirth also dwelt and all things 
were unstained by the griefs of time. Therefore ere the 
Third Age was ended the Elves perceived that the Ring of 
Sapphire was with Elrond, in the fair valley of Rivendell, 
upon whose house the stars of heaven most brightly shone; 
whereas the Ring of Adamant was in the Land of Lorien 
where dwelt the Lady Galadriel. A queen she was of the 
woodland Elves, the wife of Celeborn of Doriath, yet she 
herself was of the Noldor and remembered the Day before 
days in Valinor, and she was the mightiest and fairest of all 
the Elves that remained in Middle-earth. But the Red Ring 
remained hidden until the end, and none save Elrond and 
Galadriel and Cirdan knew to whom it had been committed. 

Thus it was that in two domains the bliss and beauty of 
the Elves remained still undiminished while that Age 
endured: in Imladris; and in Lothlorien, the hidden land 
between Celebrant and Anduin, where the trees bore 
flowers of gold and no Ore or evil thing dared ever come. 



Yet many voices were heard among the Elves foreboding 
that, if Sauron should come again, then either he would find 
the Ruling Ring that was lost, or at the best his enemies 
would discover it and destroy it; but in either chance the 
powers of the Three must then fail and all things maintained 
by them must fade, and so the Elves should pass into the 
twilight and the Dominion of Men begin. 

And so indeed it has since befallen: the One and the 
Seven and the Nine are destroyed; and the Three have 
passed away, and with them the Third Age is ended, and 
the Tales of the Eldar in Middle-earth draw to then-close. 
Those were the Fading Years, and in them the last 
flowering of the Elves east of the Sea came to its winter. In 
that time the Noldor walked still in the Hither Lands, 
mightiest and fairest of the children of the world, and their 
tongues were still heard by mortal ears. Many things of 
beauty and wonder remained on earth in that time, and 
many things also of evil and dread: Ores there were and 
trolls and dragons and fell beasts, and strange creatures 
old and wise in the woods whose names are forgotten; 
Dwarves still laboured in the hills and wrought with patient 
craft works of metal and stone that none now can rival. But 
the Dominion of Men was preparing and all things were 
changing, until at last the Dark Lord arose in Mirkwood 
again. 

Now of old the name of that forest was Greenwood the 
Great, and its wide halls and aisles were the haunt of many 
beasts and of birds of bright song; and there was the realm 
of King Thranduil under the oak and the beech. But after 
many years, when well nigh a third of that age of the world 
had passed, a darkness crept slowly through the wood from 
the southward, and fear walked there in shadowy glades; 
fell beasts came hunting, and cruel and evil creatures laid 
there their snares. 

Then the name of the forest was changed and 
Mirkwood it was called, for the nightshade lay deep there, 
and few dared to pass through, save only in the north where 
Thranduil’s people still held the evil at bay. Whence it came 
few could tell, and it was long ere even the Wise could 
discover it. It was the Shadow of Sauron and the sign of his 
return. For coming out of the wastes of the East he took up 
his abode in the south of the forest, and slowly he grew and 



took shape there again; in a dark hill he made his dwelling 
and wrought there his sorcery, and all folk feared the 
Sorcerer of Dol Guldur, and yet they knew not at first how 
great was their peril. 

Even as the first shadows were felt in Mirkwood there 
appeared in the west of Middle-earth the Istari, whom Men 
called the Wizards. None knew at that time whence they 
were, save Cirdan of the Havens, and only to Elrond and to 
Galadriel did he reveal that they came over the Sea. But 
afterwards it was said among the Elves that they were 
messengers sent by the Lords of the West to contest the 
power of Sauron, if he should arise again, and to move 
Elves and Men and all living things of good will to valiant 
deeds. In the likeness of Men they appeared, old but 
vigorous, and they changed little with the years, and aged 
but slowly, though great cares lay on them; great wisdom 
they had, and many powers of mind and hand. Long they 
journeyed far and wide among Elves and Men, and held 
converse also with beasts and with birds; and the peoples 
of Middle-earth gave to them many names, for their true 
names they did not reveal. Chief among them were those 
whom the Elves called Mithrandir and Curunir, but Men in 
the North named Gandalf and Saruman. Of these Curunir 
was the eldest and came first, and after him came 
Mithrandir and Radagast, and others of the Istari who went 
into the east of Middle-earth, and do not come into these 
tales. Radagast was the friend of all beasts and birds; but 
Curunir went most among Men, and he was subtle in 
speech and skilled in all the devices of smith-craft. 
Mithrandir was closest in counsel with Elrond and the Elves. 
He wandered far in the North and West and made never in 
any land any lasting abode; but Curunir journeyed into the 
East, and when he returned he dwelt at Orthanc in the Ring 
of Isengard, which the Numenoreans made in the days of 
their power. 

Ever most vigilant was Mithrandir, and he it was that 
most doubted the darkness in Mirkwood, for though many 
deemed that it was wrought by the Ringwraiths, he feared 
that it was indeed the first shadow of Sauron returning; and 
he went to Dol Guldur, and the Sorcerer fled from him, and 
there was a watchful peace for a long while. But at length 
the Shadow returned and its power increased; and in that 



time was first made the Council of the Wise that is called 
the White Council, and therein were Elrond and Galadriel 
and Cirdan, and other lords of the Eldar, and with them 
were Mithrandir and Curunir. And Curunir (that was 
Saruman the White) was chosen to be their chief, for he 
had most studied the devices of Sauron of old. Galadriel 
indeed had wished that Mithrandir should be the Lead of 
the Council, and Saruman begrudged them that, for his 
pride and desire of mastery was grown great; but 
Mithrandir refused the office, since he would have no ties 
and no allegiance, save to those who sent him, and he 
would abide in no place nor be subject to any summons. 
But Saruman now began to study the lore of the Rings of 
Power, their making and their history. 

Now the Shadow grew ever greater, and the hearts of 
Elrond and Mithrandir darkened. Therefore on a time 
Mithrandir at great peril went again to Dol Guldur and the 
pits of the Sorcerer, and he discovered the truth of his 
fears, and escaped. And returning to Elrond he said: 

True, alas, is our guess. This is not one of the Ulairi, 
as many have long supposed. It is Sauron himself who has 
taken shape again and now grows apace; and he is 
gathering again all the Rings to his hand; and he seeks 
ever for news of the One, and of the Heirs of Isildur, if they 
live still on earth.’ 

And Elrond answered: ‘In the hour that Isildur took the 
Ring and would not surrender it, this doom was wrought, 
that Sauron should return.’ 

‘Yet the One was lost,' said Mithrandir, ‘and while it still 
lies hid, we can master the Enemy, if we gather our strength 
and tarry not too long.' 

Then the White Council was summoned; and 
Mithrandir urged them to swift deeds, but Curunir spoke 
against him, and counselled them to wait yet and to watch. 

‘For I believe not,’ said he, ‘that the One will ever be 
found again in Middle-earth. Into Anduin it fell, and long 
ago, I deem, it was rolled to the Sea. There it shall lie until 
the end, when all this world is broken and the deeps are 
removed.' 

Therefore naught was done at that time, though 
Elrond's heart misgave him, and he said to Mithrandir: 

'Nonetheless I forbode that the One will yet be found, 



and then war will arise again, and in that war this Age will 
be ended. Indeed in a second darkness it will end, unless 
some strange chance deliver us that my eyes cannot see.’ 

'Many are the strange chances of fee world,’ said 
Mithrandir, 'and help oft shall come from the hands of the 
weak when the Wise falter.' 

Thus the Wise were troubled, but none as yet 
perceived that Curunir had turned to dark thoughts and was 
already a traitor in heart: for he desired that he and no other 
should find the Great Ring, so that he might wield it himself 
and order all the world to his will. Too long he had studied 
the ways of. Sauron in hope to defeat him, and now he 
envied him as a rival rather than hated his works. And he 
deemed that the Ring, which was Sauron's, would seek for 
its master as he became manifest once more; but if he 
were driven out again, then it would lie hid. Therefore he 
was willing to play with peril and let Sauron be for a time, 
hoping by his craft to forestall both his friends and the 
Enemy, when the Ring should appear. 

He set a watch upon the Gladden Fields; but soon he 
discovered that the servants of Dol Guldur were searching 
all the ways of the River in that region. Then he perceived 
that Sauron also had learned of the manner of Isildur's end, 
and he grew afraid and withdrew to Isengard and fortified it; 
and ever he probed deeper into the lore of the Rings of 
Power and the art of their forging. But he spoke of none of 
this to the Council, hoping still that he might be the first to 
hear news of the Ring. He gathered a great host of spies, 
and many of these were birds; for Radagast lent him his 
aid, divining naught of his treachery, and deeming that this 
was but part of the watch upon the Enemy. 

But ever the shadow in Mirkwood grew deeper, and to 
Dol Guldur evil things repaired out of all the dark places of 
the world; and they were united again under one will, and 
their malice was directed against the Elves and the 
survivors of Numenor. Therefore at last the Council was 
again summoned and the lore of the Rings was much 
debated; but Mithrandir spoke to the Council, saying: 

‘It is not needed that the Ring should be found, for 
while it abides on earth and is not unmade, still the power 
that it holds will live, and Sauron will grow and have hope. 
The might of the Elves and the Elf-friends is less now than 



of old. Soon he will be too strong for you, even without the 
Great Ring; for he rules the Nine, and of the Seven he has 
recovered three. We must strike.' 

To this Curunir now assented, desiring that Sauron 
should be thrust from Dol Guldur, which was nigh to the 
River, and should have leisure to search there no longer. 
Therefore, for the last time, he aided the Council, and they 
put forth their strength; and they assailed Dol Guldur, and 
drove Sauron from his hold, and Mirkwood for a brief while 
was made wholesome again. 

But their stroke was too late. For the Dark Lord had 
foreseen it, and he had long prepared all his movements; 
and the Ulairi, his Nine Servants, had gone before him to 
make ready for his coming. Therefore his flight was but a 
feint, and he soon returned, and ere the Wise could prevent 
him he re-entered his kingdom in Mordor and reared once 
again the dark towers of Barad-dur. And in that year the 
White Council met for the last time, and Curunir withdrew to 
Isengard, and took counsel with none save himself. 

Ores were mustering, and far to the east and the south 
the wild peoples were arming. Then in the midst of 
gathering fear and the rumour of war the foreboding of 
Elrond was proved true, and the One Ring was indeed 
found again, by a chance more strange than even 
Mithrandir had foreseen; and it was hidden from Curunir 
and from Sauron. For it had been taken from Anduin long 
ere they sought for it, being found by one of the small fisher- 
folk that dwelt by the River, ere the Kings failed in Condor; 
and by its finder it was brought beyond search into dark 
hiding under the roots of the mountains. There it dwelt, until 
even in the year of the assault upon Dol Guldur it was found 
again, by a wayfarer, fleeing into the depths of the earth 
from the pursuit of the Ores, and passed into a far distant 
country, even to the land of the Periannath, the Little 
People, the Halflings, who dwelt in the west of Eriador. And 
ere that day they had been held of small account by Elves 
and by Men, and neither Sauron nor any of the Wise save 
Mithrandir had in all their counsels given thought to them. 

Now by fortune and his vigilance Mithrandir first 
learned of the Ring, ere Sauron had news of it; yet he was 
dismayed and in doubt. For too great was the evil power of 
this thing for any of the Wise to wield, unless like Curunir he 



wished himself to become a tyrant and a dark lord in his 
turn; but neither could it be concealed from Sauron for ever, 
nor could it be unmade by the craft of the Elves. Therefore 
with the help of the Dunedain of the North Mithrandir set a 
watch upon the land of the Periannath and bided his time. 
But Sauron had many ears, and soon he heard rumour of 
the One Ring, which above all things he desired, and he 
sent forth the Nazgul to take it. Then war was kindled, and 
in battle with Sauron the Third Age ended even as it had 
begun. 

But those who saw the things that were done in that 
time, deeds of valour and wonder, have elsewhere told the 
tale of the War of the Ring, and how it ended both in victory 
unlocked for and in sorrow long foreseen. Here let it be 
said that in those days the Heir of Isildur arose in the North, 
and he took the shards of the sword of Elendil, and in 
Imladris they were reforged; and he went then to war, a 
great captain of Men. He was Aragorn son of Arathorn, the 
nine and thirtieth heir in the right line from Isildur, and yet 
more like to Elendil than any before him. Battle there was in 
Rohan, and Curunir the traitor was thrown down and 
Isengard broken; and before the City of Gondor a great 
field was fought, and the Lord of Morgul, Captain of Sauron, 
there passed into darkness; and the Heir of Isildur led the 
host of the West to the Black Gates of Mordor. 

In that last battle were Mithrandir, and the sons of 
Elrond, and the King of Rohan, and lords of Gondor, and 
the Heir of Isildur with the Dunedain of the North. There at 
the last they looked upon death and defeat, and all their 
valour was in vain; for Sauron was too strong. Yet in that 
hour was put to the proof that which Mithrandir had spoken, 
and help came from the hands of the weak when the Wise 
faltered. For, as many songs have since sung, it was the 
Periannath, the Little People, dwellers in hillsides and 
meadows, that brought them deliverance. 

For Frodo the Halfling, it is said, at the bidding of 
Mithrandir took on himself the burden, and alone with his 
servant he passed through peril and darkness and came at 
last in Sauron's despite even to Mount Doom; and there 
into the Fire where it was wrought he cast the Great Ring of 
Power, and so at last it was unmade and its evil consumed. 



Then Sauron failed, and he was utterly vanquished and 
passed away like a shadow of malice; and the towers of 
Barad-dur crumbled in ruin, and at the rumour of their fall 
many lands trembled. Thus peace came again, and a new 
Spring opened on earth; and the Heir of Isildur was 
crowned King of Gondor and Arnor, and the might of the 
Dunedain was lifted up and their glory renewed. In the 
courts of Minas Anor the White Tree flowered again, for a 
seedling was found by Mithrandir in the snows of Mindolluin 
that rose tall and white above the City of Gondor; and while 
it still grew there the Elder Days were not wholly forgotten in 
the hearts of the Kings. 

Now all these things were achieved for the most part 
by the counsel and vigilance of Mithrandir, and in the last 
few days he was revealed as a lord of great reverence, and 
clad in white he rode into battle; but not until the time came 
for him to depart was it known that he had long guarded the 
Red Ring of Fire. At the first that Ring had been entrusted 
to Cirdan, Lord of the Havens; but he had surrendered it to 
Mithrandir, for he knew whence he came and whither at last 
he would return. 




Take now this Ring,’ he said; 'for thy labours and thy 
cares will be heavy, but in all it will support thee and defend 
thee from weariness. For this is the Ring of Fire, and 
herewith, maybe, thou shalt rekindle hearts to the valour of 
old in a world that grows chill. But as for me, my heart is 
with the Sea, and I will dwell by the grey shores, guarding 
the Havens until the last ship sails. Then I shall await thee.’ 

White was that ship and long was it a-building, and 
long it awaited the end of which Cirdan had spoken. But 
when all these things were done, and the Heir of Isildur had 
taken up the lordship of Men, and the dominion of the West 
had passed to him, then it was made plain that the power of 
the Three Rings also was ended, and to the Firstborn the 
world grew old and grey. In that time the last of the Noldor 
set sail from the Havens and left Middle-earth for ever. And 
latest of all the Keepers of the Three Rings rode to the Sea, 
and Master Elrond took there the ship that Cirdan had 
made ready. In the twilight of autumn it sailed out of 
Mithlond, until the seas of the Bent World fell away beneath 


it, and the winds of the round sky troubled it no more, and 
borne upon the high airs above the mists of the world it 
passed into the Ancient West, and an end was come for 
the Eldar of story and of song. 



NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION 


The following note is intended simply to clarify a few 
main features in the pronunciation of names in the Elvish 
languages, and is by no means exhaustive. For full 
information on the subject see The Lord of the Rings 
Appendix E. 


CONSONANTS 


C — always has the value of k, never ofs; thus 
Celebom is Kelebom' not 'Selebom'. In a few cases, as 
Tulkas, Kementari a k has been used in the spelling in this 
book. 

CH — always has the value of ch in Scotch loch or 
German buch, never that of ch in English church. Examples 
are Carcharoth. Erchamion. 

DH — is always used to represent the sound of a 
voiced ('soft') th in English, that is the th in then, not the th in 
thin. Examples are Maedhros, Aredhel, Haudh-en-Arvjen. 

G — always has the sound of English g in get; thus 
Region, Eregion are not pronounced like English region, 
and the first syllable of Ginglith is as in English begin not 
as in gin. 

Consonants written twice are pronounced long; thus 
Yavanna has the long n heard in English unnamed, 
penknife, not the short n in unaimed, penny. 

\VOWELS I 

Al — has the sound of English eye; thus the second 
syllable of Edain is like English dine, not Dane. 

AU — has the value of English ow\r\ towi; thus the first 
syllable of Aule is like English on/, and the first syllable of 
Sauron is like English sour, not sore. 

El — as in Teiglin has the sound of English grey. 

IE — should not be pronounced as in English piece, 



but with both the vowels / and e sounded, and run together; 
thus Ni-enna, not 'Neena'. 

Ul — as in Uinen has the sound of English ruin. 

AE — as in Aegnor, Nimaeth, and OE as in Noegyth, 
Loeg, are combinations of the individual vowels, a-e, o-e, 
but ae may be pronounced in the same way as ai, and oe 
as in English toy 

EA and EO — are not run together, but constitute two 
syllables; these combinations are written ea and e o (or, 
when they begin names, Ea and Eo: Earendil, Eonvie). 

U — in names like Hurin, Turin, Tuna should be 
pronounced oo;thus 'Toorin' not 'Tyoorin'. 

ER, IR, UR — before a consonant (as in Nerdanel, 
Cirdan, Gurthang) or at the end of a word (as in Ainur) 
should not be pronounced as in English fern, fir, fur, but as 
in English air, eer, oor. 

E — at the end of words is always pronounced as a 
distinct vowel, and in this position is written e. It is likewise 
always pronounced in the middle of words like Celebom, 
Menegroth. 

A circumflex accent in stressed monosyllables in 
Sindarin denotes the particularly long vowel heard in such 
words (thus Hin Hurin); but in Adunaic (Numenorean) and 
Khuzdul (Dwarvish) names the circumflex is simply used to 
denote long vowels. 



INDEX OF NAMES 


Since the number of names in the book is very large, 
this index provides, in addition to page-references, a short 
statement concerning each person and place. These 
statements are not epitomes of all that is said in the text, 
and for most of the central figures in the narrative are kept 
extremely brief; but such an index is inevitably bulky, and I 
have reduced its size in various ways. 

The chief of these concerns the fact that very often the 
English translation of an Elvish name is also used as the 
name independently; thus for example the dwelling of King 
Thingol is called both Menegroth and The Thousand 
Caves' (and also both together). In most such cases I have 
combined the Elvish name and its translated meaning 
under one entry, with the result that the page-references are 
not restricted to the name that appears as the heading 
(e.g., those under Echoriath include those to 'Encircling 
Mountains'). The English renderings are given separate 
headings, but only with a simple direction to the main entry, 
and only if they occur independently. Words in inverted 
commas are translations; many of these occur in the text 
(as Tol Eressea 'the Lonely Isle'), but I have added a great 
many others. Information about some names that are not 
translated is contained in the Appendix. 

With the many titles and formal expressions in English 
whose Elvish originals are not given, such as 'the Elder 
King' and 'the Two Kindreds', I have been selective, but the 
great majority are registered. The references are in 
intention complete (and sometimes include pages where 
the subject of the entry occurs but is not actually mentioned 
by name) except in a very few cases where the name 
occurs very frequently indeed, as Beleriand, Valar. Here 
the word passim is used, but selected references are given 
to important passages; and in the entries for some of the 
Noldorin princes the many occurrences of the name that 
relate only to their sons or their houses have been 
eliminated. 

References to The Lord of the Rings are by title of the 
volume, book, and chapter. 



A da nedhel 'Elf-Man', name given to Turin in 
Nargothrond. 258 

Adunakhdr'Lorti of the West', name taken by the 
nineteenth King of Numenor, the first to do so in the 
Adunaic (Numenorean) tongue; his name in Quenya was 
Herunumen. 330 

AdurantThe sixth and most southerly of the tributaries 
of Gelion in Ossiriand. The name means 'double stream', 
referring to its divided course about the island of Tol Galen. 
147,229,290 

Aeglos 'Snow-point', the spear of Gil-galad. 364 
Aegnor The fourth son of Finarfin, who with his brother 
Angrod held the northern slopes of Dorthonion; slain in the 
Dagor Bragollach. The name means 'Fell Fire', 64,94, 141, 
180-82 

Aelin-uial 'Meres of Twilight', where Arcs flowed into 
Sirion. 133,145, 203, 267, 285 

Aerandir 'Sea-wanderer 1 , one of the three mariners 
who accompanied Earendil on his voyages. 307 

Aerin A kinswoman of Hurin in Dor-lomin; taken as 
wife by Brodda the Easterling; aided Morwen after the 
Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 243, 264 

Aftercomers The Younger Children of lluvatar, Men; 
translation of Hi Idor, 92-3, 1 14 

Agamaen 'Blood-stained', name given to himself by 
Turin when he came to Nargothrond. 257 

Agtarond 'The Glittering Cavern' of Helm's Deep in 
Ered Nimrais (see The Twd Tov\ers III 8). 361 

Aglon 'The Narrow Pass', between Dorthonion and the 
heights to the west of Himring. 147, 161, 183-4 

Ainulindale 'The Music of the Ainur', also called The 
(Great) Music, The (Great) Song. 3-9, 18, 21, 37-8, 43-4, 
50, 74, 121 , 251 . Also the name of the account of Creation 
said to have been composed by Rumil of Tirion in the Elder 
Days. 82 

Ainur 'The Holy Ones' (singular Ainu)', the first beings 
created by lluvatar, the 'order' of the Valar and Maiar, made 
before Ea. 3-9, 18,21,41,44,58, 121,251,288 

Akallabeth 'The Downfallen', Adunaic (Numenorean) 
word equivalent in meaning to Quenya Atalante. 347 Also 
the title of the account of the Downfall of Numenor. 359,360 



Alcarinque 'The Glorious', name of a star. 48 
Alcarondas The great ship of Ar-Pharazon in which he 
sailed to Aman. 343 

Aldaron 'Lord of Trees', a Quenya name of the Vala 
Orome; cf. Tauron. 22 

Aldudenie 'Lament for the Two Trees', made by a 
Vanyarin Elf named Elemmire. 84 

Almaren The first abode of the Valar in Arda, before 
the second onslaught of Melkor: an isle in a great lake in 
the midst of Middle-earth. 30-1 ,117 

Alqualonde 'Haven of the Swans', the chief city and 
haven of the Teleri on the shores of Aman. 63-5, 79, 97, 
100, 120, 130, 154, 188,309,311 

Aman 'Blessed, free from evil', the name of the land in 
the West, beyond the Great Sea, in which the Valar dwelt 
after they had left the Isle of Almaren. Often referred to as 
the Blessed Realm. Passim; see especially 32, 66, 326 
Amandil 'Lover of Aman'; the last lord of Andunie in 
Numenor, descendant of Elros and father of Elendil; set out 
on a voyage to Valinor and did not return. 335-7, 340-1, 
346, 362 

Amarie Vanyarin Elf, beloved of Finrod Felagund, who 
remained in Valinor. 155 

Amlach Son of Imlach son of Marach; a leader of 
dissension among the Men of Estolad who, repenting, took 
service with Maedhros. 173-4 

Amon Amarth 'Mount Doom', the name given to 
Orodruin when its fires awoke again after Sauron's return 
from Numenor. 363, 377 

Amon Ereb 'The Lonely Hill' (also simply Ereb), 
between Ramdal and the river Gelion in East Beleriand. 
110, 146, 184 

Amon Ethir 'The Hill of Spies', raised by Finrod 
Felagund to the east of the doors of Nargothrond. 267-8 
Amon Gmreth The hill upon which Gondolin was built, 
in the midst of the plain of Tumladen. 1 51 , 1 63, 296, 299 
Amon Obel A hill in the midst of the Forest of Brethil, 
on which was built Ephel Brandir. 249, 266, 270 

Amon Rudh 'The Bald Hill', a lonely height in the lands 
south of Brethil; abode of MTm, and lair of Turin's outlaw 
band. 246-52, 284 



Amon Sul 'Hill of the Wind', in the Kingdom of Arnor 
('Weathertop' in The Lord of the Rings). 362 
Amon Uilos Sindarin name of Oiolosse. 32 
Amras Twin-brother of Amrod, youngest of the sons of 
Feanor; slain with Amrod in the attack on Earendil's people 
at the Mouths of Sirion. 63, 93, 148, 170, 184, 305 
Amrod See Amras. 

Anach Pass leading down from Taur-nu-Fuin 
(Dorthonion) at the western end of Ered Gorgoroth. 245-6, 
251-2,299 

Anadune 'Westernesse': name of Numenor in the 
Adunaic (Numenorean) tongue (see Numenor). 322 
Anar Quenya name of the Sun. 114-6 
Anarion Younger son of Elendil, who with his father 
and his brother Isildur escaped from the Drowning of 
Numenor and founded in Middle-earth the Numenorean 
realms in exile; lord of Minas Anor; slain in the siege of 
Barad-dur. 336, 346, 360-8 

Anarrima Name of a constellation. 48 
Ancalagon Greatest of the winged dragons of 
Morgoth, destroyed by Earendil. 312 

Andor The Land of Gift': Numenor. 321 , 345, 347 
Andram The Long Wall', name of the dividing fall 
running across Beleriand. 109, 146 

Androth Caves in the bills of Mithrim where Tuor was 
fostered by the Grey-elves. 294 

Anduin The Long River', east of the Misty Mountains; 
referred to also as the Great River and the River. 55,107, 
329, 360-1 , 364, 366, 369, 374-5 

Andunie City and haven on the west coast of 
Numenor. 322, 331-2, 335. For the Lords of Andunie see 
331 

AnfauglirA name of the wolf Carcharoth, translated in 
the text as 'Jaws of Thirst'. 218 

Anfauglith Name of the plain of Ard-galen after its 
desolation by Morgoth in the Battle of Sudden Flame; 
translated in the text as 'the Gasping Dust'. Cf. Dor-nu- 
Fauglith. 181 , 194, 215, 232-4, 241 , 254-5, 261 , 280, 31 1 
Angainor The chain wrought by Aule with which Melkor 
was twice bound. 52, 312 



Angband 'Iron Prison, Hell of Iron', the great dungeon- 
fortress of Morgoth in the Northwest of Middle-earth. 
Passim; see especially 47, 90, 109, 139, 217. The Siege 
of Angband 36, 139-40, 144, 148, 158, 182, 192, 202 
Anghabar 'Iron-delvings', a mine in the Encircling 
Mountains about the plain of Gondolin. 166 

Anglachel The sword made from meteoric iron that 
Thingol received from Eol and which he gave to Beleg; 
after its reforging for Turin named Gurthang. 247, 253-57 
Angrenost 'Iron Fortress', Numenorean fortress on the 
west borders of Gondor, afterwards inhabited by the wizard 
Curunlr (Saruman); see Isengard. 361 

Angrim Father of Gorlim the Unhappy. 1 95 
Angrist 'Iron-cleaver', the knife made by Telchar of 
Nogrod, taken from Curufin by Beren and used by him to 
cut the Silmarilfrom Morgoth's crown. 215, 219 

Angrod The third son of Finarfin, who with his brother 
Aegnor held the northern slopes of Dorthonion; slain in the 
Dagor Bragollach. 64, 94, 130-1, 141, 154, 180-2, 260 
Anguirel Eol's sword, made of the same metal as 
Anglachel. 247 

Annael Grey-elf of Mithrim, fosterfather of Tuor. 294 
Annatar 'Lord of Gifts', name given to himself by 
Sauron in the Second Age, in that time when he appeared 
in a fair form among the Eldar who remained in Middle- 
earth. 355 

Annon-in-Gelydh 'Gate of the Noldor', entrance to a 
subterranean watercourse in the western hills of Dor-lomin, 
leading to Cirith Ninniach. 294 

Annuminas 'Tower of the West' (i.e. of Westernesse, 
Numenor); city of the Kings of Amor beside Lake Nenuial. 
360, 362, 367 

Anor See Minas Anor. 

Apanonar 'The Afterborn', an Elvish name for Men. 
119 

Aradan Sindarin name of Malach, son of Marach. 172, 
177 

Aragom The thirty-ninth Heir of Isildur in the direct line; 
King of the reunited realms of Amor and Gondor after the 
War of the Ring; wedded Arwen, daughter of Elrond. 377. 
Called the Heir of Isildur 377 



Araman Barren wasteland on the coast of Aman, 
between the Pelori and the Sea, extending northward to the 
Helcaraxe. 79, 88, 97,1 01 , 1 1 6-7,1 23, 1 29, 297 
Aranel Name of Dior Thingol's Heir. 229 
Aranruth 'King's Ire', the name of Thingol's sword. 
Aranruth survived the ruin of Doriath and was possessed by 
the Kings of Numenor. 247 

Aranwe Elf of Gondolin, father of Voronwe. 295 
Aratan Second son of Isildur, slain with him at the 
Gladden Fields. 366 

Aratar 'The Exalted', the eight Valar of greatest power. 
23 

Arathom Father of Aragorn. 377 
Arda 'The Realm', name of the Earth as the Kingdom 
of Manwe. Passim; see especially 8,12 

Ard-galen The great grassy plain north of Dorthonion, 
called after its desolation Anfauglith and Dor-nu-Fauglith. 
The name means 'the Green Region'; cf. Calenardhon 
(Rohan). 124, 135-6, 144, 181 

Aredhel 'Noble Elf, the sister of Turgon of Gondolin, 
who was ensnared by Eol in Nan Elmoth and bore to him 
Maeglin; called also Ar-Feiniel, the White Lady of the 
Noldor, the White Lady of Gondolin. 64, 156-65, 247 
Ar-Feiniel See Aredhel. 

Ar-Gimiizor Twenty-second King of Numenor, 
persecutor of the Elendili. 331-2 

Argonath 'King-stones', the Pillars of the Kings, great 
carvings of Isildur and Anarion on the Anduin at the 
entrance to the northern bounds of Gondor (see The 
Fellowship of the Ring II 9). 361 , 369 

Aden A Maia, chosen by the Valar to guide the vessel 
of the Sun. 114-7 

Armenelos City of the Kings in Numenor. 322, 324, 
333-7, 361 

Arminas See Gel mi r (2). 

Amor 'Land of the King', the northern realm of the 
Numenoreans in Middle-earth, established by Elendil after 
his escape from the Drowning of Numenor. 361-2, 377 
Aros The southern river of Doriath. 109, 131, 145, 
147-8, 157, 158, 176,287-9 



Arossiach The Fords of Arcs, near the north-eastern 
edge ofDoriath. 145, 158, 162 

Ar-Pharazon The Golden', twenty-fourth and last King 
of Numenor; named in Quenya Tar-Calion; captor of 
Sauron, by whom he was seduced; commander of the 
great fleet that went against Aman. 333-47 
Ar-Sakalthor Father of Ar-Gimilzor. 331 
Arthad One of the twelve companions of Barahir on 
Dorthonion. 187 

Arvernien The coastlands of Middle-earth west of 
Sirion's mouths. Cf. Bilbo's song at Rivendell: 'Earendil was 
a mariner that tarried in Arvernien...' (The Fell ov\sh ip of the 
Ring 111). 302 

Ar-Zimraphel See Mlriel (2). 

Ascar The most northerly of the tributaries of Gelion in 
Ossiriand (afterwards called Rathloriel). The name means 
'rushing, impetuous'. 104, 146-8, 167, 174, 291 

Astaldo 'The Valiant', name of the Vala Tulkas. 22 
Atalante 'The Downfallen'. Quenya word equivalent in 
meaning to Akallabeth, 347 

Atanamir See Tar-Atanamir. 

Atanatari 'Fathers of Men'; see Atani. 120, 232 
Atani 'The Second People', Men (singular Atan). For 
the origin of the name see 171; since in Beleriand for a 
long time the only Men known to the Noldor and Sindar 
were those of the Three Houses of the Elf-friends, this 
name (in the Sindarin form Adan, plural Edain) became 
specially associated with them, so that it was seldom 
applied to other Men who came later to Beleriand, or who 
were reported to be dwelling beyond the Mountains. But in 
the speech of lluvatar (41 ) the meaning is 'Men (in general)'. 
38, 119, 171; Edain, 171-2, 176-9, 189-90, 238, 241, 292, 
319-21,347 

Aule A Vala, one of the Aratar, the smith and master of 
crafts, spouse of Yavanna; see especially 20, 23, and for 
his making of the Dwarves 40 ff., 8-9, 18, 20, 23-4, 26, 30, 
35, 37, 40-5, 51 , 54, 62, 65, 69, 75, 87, 95, 1 04, 1 1 3, 321 
Avallone Haven and city of the Eldar on Tol Eressea, 
so named, according to the Akallabeth, 'for it is of all cities 
the nearest to Valinor’. 320, 325, 332, 344, 348-9, 362, 
368 



Avail The Unwilling, the Refusers', the name given to 
all those Elves who refused to join the westward march 
from Cuivienen. See Eldar and Dark Elves. 53, 107, 
113,355 

Avathar' The Shadows', the forsaken land on the coast 
of Aman south of the Bay of Eldamar, between the Pelori 
and the Sea, where Melkor met Ungoliant 80-1 , 88,1 16 
Azaghal Lord of the Dwarves of Belegost; wounded 
Glaurung in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and was killed by him. 
236 

Balan The name of Beor the Old before he took 
service with Finrod. 170 

Balar The great bay to the south of Beleriand into 
which the river Sirion flowed. 52, 56, 59, 60, 142. Also the 
isle in the bay, said to have been the eastern horn of Tol 
Eressea that broke away, where Cirdan and Gil-galad 
dwelt after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 59, 105, 144, 192, 239, 
302, 304-5 

Balrog 'Demon of Might', Sindarin form (Quenya 
Valarauko) of the name of the demons of fire that served 
Morgoth. 26, 46, 90, 125, 144, 182, 202, 235, 300-1 

Barad-dur 'The Dark Tower' of Sauron in Mordor. 329, 
334, 347, 363, 365, 375, 377 

Barad Eithel 'Tower of the Well', the fortress of the 
Noldorat Eithel Sirion. 233 

Barad Nimras 'White Horn Tower 1 , raised by Finrod 
Felagund on the cape west of Eglarest, 142, 239 

Baragund Father of Morwen the wife of Hurin; nephew 
of Barahir and one of his twelve companions on 
Dorthonion. 1 77, 1 87, 1 94, 242, 31 1 

Barahir Father of Beren; rescued Finrod Felagund in 
the Dagor Bragollach, and received from him his ring; slain 
on Dorthonion. For the later history of the ring of Barahir, 
which became an heirloom of the House of Isildur, see The 
Lord of the Rings Appendix A (I, iii). 121, 177, 182-3, 186- 
7, 1 94-7, 201-5, 226, 229, 243. 285, 31 1 
Baran Elder son of Beor the Old. 1 70-1 
Baranduin 'The Brown River 1 in Eriador, flowing into 
the Sea south of the Blue Mountains; the Brandywine of the 
Shire in The Lord of the Rings. 360 

Bar-en-Danv\edh 'House of Ransom', the name that 



MTm the Dwarf gave to his dwelling on Amon Rudh when he 
yielded it to Turin. 248, 252 

Battles of Beleriand The first battle: 96. The second 
battle (the Battle-under-Stars): see Dagor-nuin-Giliath. The 
third battle (the Glorious Battle): see DagorAglareb. The 
fourth battle (the Battle of Sudden Flame): see Dagor 
Bragollach. The fifth battle (Unnumbered Tears): see 
Nimaeth Amoediad. The Great Battle: 311-2 

Bauglir A name of Morgoth: 'the Constrainer'. 120, 
243,259,286,315 

Beleg A great archer and chief of the marchwardens 
of Doriath; called Cuthalion 'Strongbow'; friend and 
companion of Turin, by whom he was slain. 190, 225-6, 
230,243-8,251-7, 278 

Belegaer The Great Sea' of the West, between 
Middle-earth and Aman. Named Belegaer 32, 100, 295; 
but very frequently called the (Great) Sea, also the Western 
Sea and the Great Water. 

Belegost 'Great Fortress', one of the two cities of the 
Dwarves in the Blue Mountains; translation into Sindarin of 
D wa rvi s h Gabilgathol. See Mickleburg. 104, 107, 132, 
158,231,236,250,285,288 

Belegund Father of Rian the wife of Huor; nephew of 
Barahir and one of his twelve companions on Dorthonion. 
177, 187, 194,242 

Beleriand The name was said to have signified 'the 
country of Balar', and to have been given at first to the lands 
about the mouths of Sirion that faced the Isle of Balar. Later 
the name spread to include all the ancient coast of the 
Northwest of Middle-earth south of the Firth of Drengist, 
and all the inner lands south of Hithlum and eastwards to 
the feet of the Blue Mountains, divided by the river Sirion 
into East and West Beleriand. Beleriand was broken in the 
turmoils at the end of the First Age, and invaded by the sea, 
so that only Ossiriand (Lindon) remained. Passim; see 
especially 142-8, 313, 354-5 

Belfalas Region on the southern coast of Gondor 
looking on to the great bay of the same name; Bay of 
Belfalas 361 

Belthil 'Divine radiance', the image of Telperion made 
by Turgon in Gondolin. 1 51 



Belthronding The bow of Beleg Cuthalion, which was 
buried with him. 256 

Beor Called the Old; leader of the first Men to enter 
Beleriand; vassal of Finrod Felagund; progenitor of the 
House of Beor (called also the Eldest House of Men and 
the First House of the Edain)-, see Balan. 167-72, 177-80, 
204. House of, People of, Beor 172-4, 177, 183, 189-90, 
194 

Bereg Grandson of Baran son of Beor the Old (this is 
not stated in the text); a leader of dissension among the 
Men of Estolad; went back over the mountains into Eriador. 
173-4 

Beren Son of Barahir; cut a Silmaril from Morgoth's 
crown to be the bride-price of Luthien Thingol's daughter, 
and was slain by Carcharoth the wolf of Angband; but 
returning from the dead, alone of mortal Men, lived 
afterwards with Luthien on Tol Galen in Ossiriand, and 
fought with the Dwarves at Sam Athrad. Great-grandfather 
of Elrond and Elros and ancestor of the Numenorean 
Kings. Called also Camlost, Erchamion, and One-hand. 
121, 147, 177, 187, 194-206, 208-30, 242, 258, 285, 290- 
1,305 

Black Land See Mordor. 

Black Smrd See Mormegil. 

Black Years See 359, 365 

Blessed Realm See Aman. 

Blue Mountains See Ered Luin and Ered Lindon. 

Bor A chieftain of the Easterlings, follower with his 
three sons of Maedhros and Maglor. 189, 231 . Sons of Bor 
235 

Borlach One of the three sons of Bor; slain with his 
brothers in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 189 

Borlad One of the three sons of Bor; see Borlach. 

Boromir Great-grandson of Beor the Old, grandfather 
of Barahir father of Beren; first lord of Ladros. 1 77 

Boron Father of Boromir. 1 77 

Borthand One of the three sons of Bor; see Borlach. 

Bragollach See DagorBragollach. 

Brandir Called the Lame; ruler of the People of Haleth 
after the death of Handir his father; enamoured of Nienor; 



slain by Turin. 266, 271-7 

Bregolas Father of Baragund and Belegund; slain in 
the Dagor Bragollach. 177,182, 187 

Bregor Father of Barahir and Bregolas. 177 
Brethil The forest between the rivers Teiglin and 
Sirion, dwelling-place of the Haladin (the People of Haleth). 
142, 176, 187, 190-2, 214, 231, 234, 238, 246, 249, 251, 
260, 266, 269-72, 277-8, 282-3 

Bridge ofEsgalduin See lant I aur. 

Brilthor 'Glittering Torrent', the fourth of the tributaries 
of Gelion in Ossiriand. 147 

Brithiach The ford over Sirion north of the Forest of 
Brethil. 157, 163, 176, 190,253,281,282 

Brithombar The northern of the Havens of the Falas on 
the coast of Beleriand. 60, 125, 142, 239, 304 

Brithon The river that flowed into the Great Sea at 
Brithombar. 239 

Brodda An Easterling in Hithlum after the Nirnaeth 
Arnoediad who took as wife Aerin, kinswoman of Hurin; 
slain by Turin. 243, 264 

Cabed-en-Aras Deep gorge in the river Teiglin, where 
Turin slew Glaurung, and where Nienor leapt to her death; 
see Cabed Naeramarth. 272, 275, 278 

Cabed Naeramarth 'Leap of Dreadful Doom', name 
given to Cabed-en-Aras after Nienor leapt from its cliffs. 
276, 282 

Calacirya 'Cleft of Light', the pass made in the 
mountains of the Pelori, in which was raised the green hill 
of Tuna. 62, 65, 79, 101, 117-8, 307 

Calaquendi 'Elves of the Light', those Elves who lived 
or had lived inAman (the High Elves). See Moriquendi and 
Dark Elves, 54, 58, 121, 125 

Calenardhon 'The Green Province', name of Rohan 
when it was the northern part of Gondor; cf. Ard-galen. 369 
Camlost 'Empty-handed', name taken by Beren after 
his return to King Thingol without the Silmaril. 221 , 226 
Caragdur The precipice on the north side of Amon 
Gwareth (the hill of Gondolin) from which Eol was cast to 
his death. 165 

Caranthir The fourth son of Feanor, called the Dark; 
'the harshest of the brothers and the most quick to anger 1 ; 



ruled in Thargelion; slain in the assault on Doriath. 63, 93, 
131-2, 148, 154, 158, 171, 184, 189,292 

Carcharoth The great wolf of Angband that bit off the 
hand of Beren bearing the Silmaril; slain by Huan in 
Doriath. The name is translated in the text as 'the Red 
Maw'. Called also Anfauglir. 218-20, 223-6 

Cardolan Region in the south of Eriador, a part of the 
Kingdom of Amor. 360 

Camil Name of a (red) star. 48 
Celebom (1) 'Tree of Silver', name of the Tree of Tol 
Eressea, a scion of Galathilion. 62, 324 

Celebom (2) Elf of Doriath, kinsman of Thingol; 
wedded Galadriel and with her remained in Middle-earth 
after the end of the First Age. 134-5, 290, 315, 370 

Celebrant 'Silver Lode', river running from Mirrormere 
through Lothlorien to join the Anduin. 370 

Celebrimbor 'Hand of Silver', son of Curufin, who 
remained in Nargothrond when his father was expelled. In 
the Second Age greatest of the smiths of Eregion; maker 
of the Three Rings of the Elves; slain by Sauron. 214, 355, 
357 

Celebrindal 'Silverfoof ; see Idril. 

Celebros 'Silver Foam' or 'Silver Rain', a stream in 
Brethil falling down to Teiglin near the Crossings. 270 

Celegorm The third son of Feanor, called the Fair; until 
the Dagor Bragollach lord of the region of Himlad with 
Curufin his brother; dwelt in Nargothrond and imprisoned 
Luthien; master of Huan the wolfhound; slain by Dior in 
Menegroth. 63, 65-6, 93, 124, 147, 157-8, 161, 183, 204-6, 
208-9, 213-5, 223, 230, 292, 355 

Celon River flowing southwest from the Hill of Himring, 
a tributary of Aros. The name means 'stream flowing down 
from heights'. 109, 148, 158, 161, 170, 176, 188 

Children of lluvatar Also Children of Eru: translations 
of H ini lluvataro, Eruhini; the Firstborn and the Followers, 
Elves and Men. Also The Children, Children of the Earth, 
Children of the World. Passim; see especially 7-8, 37-8 
Clrdan 'The Shipwright'; Telerin Elf, lord of the Falas 
(coasts of West Beleriand); at the destruction of the Havens 
after the Nimaeth Arnoediad escaped with Gil-galad to the 
Isle of Balar; during the Second and Third Ages keeper of 



the Grey Havens in the Gulf of Lhun; at the coming of 
Mithrandir entrusted to him Narya, the Ring of Fire. 60, 1 03- 
4, 110, 124, 133, 142, 153, 194, 239-40, 260, 302, 304-5, 
315,366, 370-3, 378 

Cirith Ninniach 'Rainbow Cleft', by which Tuor came to 
the Western Sea; see Annon-in-Gelydh. 294 

Cirith Thoronath 'Eagles' Cleft', a high pass in the 
mountains north of Gondolin, where Glorfindel fought with a 
Balrog and fell into the abyss. 301 

Cirth The Runes, first devised by Daeron of Doriath. 

108 

Ciryon Third son of Isildur, slain with him at the 
Gladden Fields. 366 

Corollaire 'The Green Mound' of the Two Trees in 
Valinor; also called Ezellohar. 33 

Crissaegrim The mountain-peaks south of Gondolin, 
where were the eyries of Thorondor. 144, 186, 191, 221, 
246, 281 

Crossings of Teiglin In the southwest of the Forest of 
Brethil, where the old road southward from the Pass of 
Sirion crossed the Teiglin. 176, 252, 267, 269, 275, 277, 
282 

Cuivienen 'Water of Awakening', the lake in Middle- 
earth where the first Elves awoke, and where they were 
found by Orome. 48, 50-4, 57, 92, 1 14, 288 
Culurien A name of Laurelin. 33 
Curufin The fifth son of Feanor, called the Crafty; father 
of Celebrimbor. For the origin of his name see Feanor; and 
for his history see Celegorm. 63, 93, 147, 157, 161-2, 183, 
204-5, 208-9, 213-5, 222-3, 230,292, 355 
Curufinvie See Feanor. 67, 75 
Curunir 'The one of cunning devices'. Elvish name of 
Saruman, one of the Istari (Wizards). 372-7 
Cuthalion 'Strongbow'; see Beleg. 

Daeron Minstrel and chief loremaster of King Thingol; 
deviser of the Cirth (Runes); enamoured of Luthien and 
twice betrayed her. 108, 133, 200, 208, 222, 314 

Dagnir One of the twelve companions of Barahir on 
Dorthonion. 187 

Dagnir Glaurunga 'Glaurung's Bane', Turin. 177, 278 
DagorAglareb 'The Glorious Battle', third of the great 



battles in the Wars of Beleriand. 135-6, 139, 149 

Dagor Bragollach The Battle of Sudden Flame' (also 
simply the Bragollach), fourth of the great battles in the 
Wars of Beleriand. 181, 187, 190, 193,230,233, 239,260 
Dagorlad 'Battle Plain', the place of the great battle 
north of Mordor between Sauron and the Last Alliance of 
Elves and Men at the end of the Second Age. 364, 367 
Dagor-nuin-Giliath 'The Battle-under-Stars', the 
second battle in the Wars of Beleriand, fought in Mithrim 
after the coming of Feanorto Middle-earth. 124 

Dairuin One of the twelve companions of Barahir on 
Dorthonion. 187 

Dark Elves In the language of Aman all Elves that did 
not cross the Great Sea were Dark Elves ( Moriquendi ), 
and the term is sometimes used thus, 121, 131; when 
Caranthir called Thingol a Dark Elf it was intended 
opprobriously, and was especially so, since Thingol had 
been to Aman 'and was not accounted among the 
Moriquendi' (56). But in the period of the Exile of the Noldor 
it was often used of the Elves of Middle-earth other than the 
Noldor and the Sindar, and is then virtually equivalent to 
Avari (120, 146, 168). Different again is the title Dark Elf of 
the Sindarin Elf Eol, 158, 162, 247; but at 164 Turgon no 
doubt meant that Eol was of the Moriquendi. 

Dark Lord, The The term is used of Morgoth, 280, and 
of Sauron, 359, 37 1 , 375 
Day of Flight See 359 
Deathless Lands See Undying Lands. 

Deldumth One of the later names of Dorthonion (Taur- 
nu-Fuin), meaning 'Horror of Night-shadow'. 186 

Denethor Son of Lenwe; leader of the Nandorin Elves 
that came at last over the Blue Mountains and dwelt in 
Ossiriand; slain on Amon Ereb in the First Battle of 
Beleriand. 56, 108-9,146 

Dimbar The land between the rivers Sirion and 
Mindeb. 144, 157, 191,214,246-7,251-3, 281 

Dimrost The falls of Celebros in the Forest of Brethil; 
translated in the text as 'the Rainy Stair'. Afterwards called 
Nen Girith. 270 

Dior Called Aranel, and also El uch II 'Thingol's Heir 1 ; 
son of Beren and Luthien and father of Elwing, Elrond's 



mother; came to Doriath from Ossiriand after the death of 
Thingol, and received the Silmaril after the death of Beren 
and Luthien; slain in Menegroth by the sons of Feanor. 229, 
290-3, 297, 302, 305, 310, 314 

Dispossessed, The The House of Feanor. 99, 1 30 

Del Guldur 'Hill of Sorcery 1 , fastness of the 
Necromancer (Sauron) in southern Mirkwood in the Third 
Age. 372-5 

Dolmed'\Nei Head' a great mountain in the Ered Luin, 
near the Dwarf-cities of Nogrod and Belegost 104, 110, 

236, 290 

Dor Caranthir 'Land of Caranthir'; see Thargelion. 
148, 174, 184 

Dor-Cuarthol 'Land of Bow and Helm', name of the 
country defended by Beleg and Turin from their lair on 
Amon Rudh. 252 

Dor Daedeloth 'Land of the Shadow of Horror 1 , the 
land of Morgoth in the north. 124, 127, 130 

Dor Diner) 'The Silent Land', where nothing dwelt, 
between the upper waters of Esgalduin and Aros. 145 

Dor Fim-i-Guinar'Land of the Dead that Live', name of 
that region in Ossiriand where Beren and Luthien dwelt 
after their return. 229, 291 

Doriath 'Land of the Pence' (Dor lath), referring to the 
Girdle of Melian, earlier called Eglador; the kingdom of 
Thingol and Melian in the forests of Neldoreth and Region, 
ruled from Menegroth on the river Esgalduin. Also called 
the Hidden Kingdom. Passim; see especially 111, 144-5 

Dorlas A Man of the Haladin in Brethil; went with Turin 
and Hunthor to the attack on Glaurung, but withdrew in fear; 
slain by Brandir the Lame. 266, 271-2, 276. The wife of 
Dorlas, not named, 276. 

Dor-lomin Region in the south of Hithlum, the territory 
of Fingon, given as a fief to the House of Hador; the home 
of Hurin and Morwen. 101, 140-2, 177, 187, 191-3, 232, 

237, 242-4, 251, 257, 260, 263-7, 276-7, 282, 284, 286, 
294. The Lady of Dor-lomin: Morwen. 242 

Dor-nu-Fauglith 'Land under Choking Ash'; see 
Anfauglith. 184, 221 

Dorthonion 'Land of Pines', the great forested 
highlands on the northern borders of Beleriand, afterwards 



called Taur-nu-Fuin. Cf. Tree-beard's song in The Two 
Towers III 4: To the pine-trees upon the highland of 
Dorthonion I climbed in the Winter...' 52, 109, 124, 130, 
135-7, 141-4, 146-8, 172, 177, 181-4, 186, 194-7, 231 

Dragon-helm of Dor-1 dm in Heirloom of the House of 
Hador, worn by Turin; also called the Helm of Hador. 114, 
251,260,284 

Dragons 235, 300, 312, 320, 358, 371 

Draugluin The great werewolf slain by Huan at Tol-in- 
Gaurhoth, and in whose form Beren entered Angband. 211 , 
216-18 

Drengist The long firth that pierced Ered Lomin, the 
west-fence of Hithlum. 56, 89, 101, 111, 115, 136, 140, 
194 

Dry River The river that once flowed out under the 
Encircling Mountains from the primeval lake where was 
afterwards Tumladen, the plain of Gondolin. 163, 281 

Duilwen The fifth of the tributaries of Gelion in 
Ossiriand. 147 

Dunedain 'The Edain of the West'; see 
Numenoreans. 

Dungartheb See Nan Dungortheb. 

Durin Lord of the Dwarves of Khazad-dum (Moria), 42, 
364 

Dwarf-road Road leading down into Beleriand from the 
cities of Nogrod and Belegost, and crossing Gelion at the 
ford of Sarn Athrad. 167, 171, 174 

Dwarrowdelf 'Delving of the Dwarves': translation of 
Khazad-dum ( Hadhodrond ). 1 04 

Dwarves 40-2, 103-7, 132-4, 148, 158-61, 167, 189, 
231, 236, 250, 258, 287-91, 354, 357-8, 364, 371. 
Referring to the Petty-Dwarves: 248-53, 261, 284. Seven 
Fathers of the Dwarves: 40-2, 1 04. For the Necklace of the 
Dwarves see Nauglamlr. For the Seven Rings of the 
Dwan/es see Rings of Power. See also Naugrim. 

Ea The World, the material Universe; Ea, meaning in 
Elvish 'It is' or 'Let it be', was the word of lluvatar when the 
World began its existence. 10, 17-8, 23, 30, 34, 40, 48-9, 
58,78,82,86,95,99, 112 

Eagles 44-5, 129, 144, 149,221,281,299,343 



Earendil Called 'Halfelven', 'the Blessed', 'the Bright', 
and 'the Mariner 1 ; son of Tuor and Idril Turgon's daughter; 
escaped from the sack of Gondolin and wedded Elwing 
daughter of Dior at the Mouths of Sirion; sailed with her to 
Aman and pleaded for help against Morgoth; set to sail the 
skies in his ship Vingilot bearing the Silmaril that Beren 
and Luthien brought out of Angband. The name means 
'Lover of the Sea'. 122, 177, 298-300, 302, 304-9, 312, 
315, 319-22, 325, 334, 341, 345, 348, 354. Lay of 
Earendil 304, 31 9 

Earendur(l) A lord of Andunie in Numenor. 331 
Earendur (2) Tenth King of Arnor. 367 
Ea/n/V Thirty-second King of Gondor. 369 
Eamur Son of Earnil; last King of Gondor, in whom the 
line of Anarion came to its end. 369 

Earrame 'Sea-wing', the name of Tuor's ship. 303 
Earner? Daughter of Olwe of Alqualonde, Thingol's 
brother; wedded Finarfin of the Noldor. From Earwen 
Finrod, Orodreth, Angrod, Aegnor and Galadriel had 
Telerin blood and were therefore allowed entry into Doriath. 
63,130,154 

Easterlings Also called Svarthy Men; entered 
Beleriand from the East in the time after the Dagor 
Bragollach, and fought on both sides in the Nirnaeth 
Arnoediad; given Hithlum as a dwelling-place by Morgoth, 
where they oppressed the remnant of the People of Hador. 
189, 235, 239, 242, 264, 265, 280, 294 
Echoing Mountains See Ered Lomin. 

Echoriath 'The Encircling Mountains' about the plain of 
Gondolin. 1 35, 1 66, 1 91 , 281 , 297-8 

Echtelion Elf-lord of Gondolin, who in the sack of the 
city slew and was slain by Gothmog Lord of Balrogs. 125, 
237, 296, 300 

Edain See Atani. 

Edrahil Chief of the Elves of Nargothrond who 
accompanied Finrod and Beren on their quest, and died in 
the dungeons of Tol-in-Gaurhoth. 206 

Eglador The former name of Doriath, before it was 
encompassed by the Girdle of Melian; probably connected 
with the name Eglath. 1 1 1 

Eglarest The southern of the Havens of the Falas on 



the coast of Beleriand. 60, 109, 125, 142, 145,239, 304 
Eglath The Forsaken People', name given to 
themselves by the Telerin Elves who remained in Beleriand 
seeking for Elwe (Thingol) when the main host of the Teleri 
departed to Aman. 60, 288 

Eilinel The wife of Gorlim the Unhappy. 165-6 
Eithel Ivrin Tvrin's Well', the source of the river Narog 
beneath Ered Wethrin. 256, 261 

Eithel Si rion 'Sin on's Well', in the eastern face of Ered 
Wethrin, where was the great fortress of Fingolfin and 
Fingon (see Barad Eithel). 124, 140-1, 183, 193, 232-3 
Ekkaia Elvish name of the Outer Sea, encircling Arda; 
referred to also as the Outer Ocean and the Encircling 
Sea. 32,40,51,65, 115-6, 121,227 

Elbereth The usual name of Varda in Sindarin, 'Star- 
Queen'; cf. Elentari. 19, 36 

Eldalie 'The Elven-folk', used as equivalent to Eldar. 
12, 54, 59, 71 ,150, 200, 222, 227-8, 232, 247, 31 5 

Eldamar 'Elvenhome', the region of Aman in which the 
Elves dwelt; also the great Bay of the same name. 61 , 65, 
67, 75-6, 79-80, 97, 160, 213, 306 

Eldar According to Elvish legend the name Eldar 
'People of the Stars' was given to all the Elves by the Vala 
Orome (49). It came however to be used to refer only to the 
Elves of the Three Kindreds (Vanyar, Noldor, and Teleri) 
who set out on the great westward march from Cuivienen 
(whether or not they remained in Middle-earth), and to 
exclude the Avari. The Elves of Aman, and all Elves who 
ever dwelt in Aman, were called the High Elves (Tareldar) 
and Elves of the Light ( Calaquendi ); see Dark Elves, 
Umanyar. Passim; see entry Elves. 

Eldarin Of the Eldar; used in reference to the 
language(s) of the Eldar. The occurrences of the term in 
fact refer to Quenya, also called High Eldarin and High- 
elven; see Quenya. 

Elder Days The First Age; also called the Eldest 
Days. 24, 33, 119, 134, 256, 258, 285, 289, 299, 365, 
377-8 

Elder King Manwe. 309, 312 
Eledh/en See Momen. 



Elemmire (1) Name of a star. 48 
Elemmire (2) Vanyarin Elf, maker of the Aldudenie, 
the Lament for the Two Trees. 84 

Elende A name of Eldamar. 65, 96, 1 30 
Elendil Called the Tall; son of Amandil, last lord of 
Andunie in Numenor, descended from Earendil and Elwing 
but not of the direct line of the Kings; escaped with his sons 
Isildur and Anarion from the Drowning of Numenor and 
founded the Numenorean realms in Middle-earth; slain with 
Gil-galad in the overthrow of Sauron at the end of the 
Second Age. The name may be interpreted either as 'Elf- 
friend' (cf. Elendili) or as 'Star-lover'. 337, 340-2, 360-7, 
370, 377. Heirs of Elendil 365 

Elendili 'Elf-friends', name given to those 
Numenoreans who were not estranged from the Eldar in the 
days of Tar-Ancalimon and later kings; also called the 
Faithful. 328-32, 335-7, 340-1, 361-2 

Elendur Eldest son of Isildur, slain with him at the 
Gladden Fields. 366 

Elenna A (Quenya) name of Numenor, 'Starwards', 
from the guidance of the Edain by Earendil on their voyage 
to Numenor at the beginning of the Second Age. 321 , 345, 
347 

Elentari 'Star-Queen', a name of Varda as maker of 
the Stars. She is called thus in Galadriel's lament in Lorien, 
The Fellomhip of the Ring II 8 . Cf. Elbereth, Tintalle. 48 
Elenv\e Wife of Turgon; perished in the crossing of the 
Helcaraxe. 102, 160 

Elerrina 'Crowned with Stars', a name of Taniquetil. 32 
Elf-friends The Men of the Three Houses of Beor, 
Haleth, and Hador, the Edain. 169, 172-4, 231, 243, 311. In 
the Akallabeth and in Of the Rings of Pover used of those 
Numenoreans who were not estranged from the Eldar; see 
Elendili. At 375 the reference is no doubt to the Men of 
Gondor and the Dunedain of the North. 

Elostirion Tallest of the towers upon Emyn Beraid, in 
which the palantir\Nas placed. 362 

Elrond Son of Earendil and Elwing, who at the end of 
the First Age chose to belong to the Firstborn, and 
remained in Middle-earth until the end of the Third Age; 
master of Imladris (Rivendell) and keeper of Vilya, the Ring 



of Air, which he had received from Gil-galad. Called Master 
Elrond and Elrond Half-elven. The name means 'Star- 
dome'. 122, 306, 315, 322, 354-6, 366-75, 37S, Sons of 
Elrond 377 

Elros Son of Earendil and Elwing, who at the end of 
the First Age chose to be numbered among Men, and 
became the first King of Numenor (called Tar-Minyatur), 
living to a very great age. The name means 'Star-foam'. 
305, 315, 322, 328-32, 336, 354, 360 

E/tvSindarinform of Elwe. 58,103, 125, 288 

Eluchll 'Heir of Elu (Thingol)', name of Dior, son of 
Beren and Luthien. See Dior. 

Elured Elder son of Dior; perished in the attack on 
Doriath by the sons of Feanor. The name means the same 
as Eluchll. 290, 292 

Elurln Younger son of Dior; perished with his brother 
Elured. The name means 'Remembrance of Elu (Thingol)'. 
290,292 

Elvenhome See Eldamar. 

Elves See especially 37-9, 48-51 , 53, 99, 121 , 326-7; 
and see also Children of II uvatar, Eldar; Dark Elves. Elves 
of the Light: see Calaquendi. 

Elv\e Surnamed Singollo 'Greymantle'; leader with his 
brother Olwe of the hosts of the Teleri on the westward 
journey from Cuivienen, until he was lost in Nan Elmoth; 
afterwards Lord of the Sindar, ruling in Doriath with Melian; 
received the Silmaril from Beren; slain in Menegroth by the 
Dwarves. Called (Elu) Thingol in Sindarin. See Dark 
Elves, Thingol. 53-8, 60-1, 103, 289 

Elwng Daughter of Dior, who escaping from Doriath 
with the Silmaril wedded Earendil at the Mouths of Sirion 
and went with him to Valinor; mother of Elrond and Elros. 
The name means 'Star-spray 1 ; see Lanlhir Lamath. 122, 
178,291-3,302, 304-10,315 

Emeldir Called the Man-hearted; wife of Barahir and 
mother of Beren; led the women and children of the House 
of Beor from Dorthonion after the Dagor Bragollach. (She 
was herself also a descendant of Beor the Old, and her 
father's name was Beren; this is not stated in the text.) 187, 
194 



Emyn Beraid The Tower Hills' in the west of Eriador; 
see Elostirion. 360-2 

Enchanted Isles The islands set by the Valar in the 
Great Sea eastwards of Tol Eressea at the time of the 
Hiding of Valinor. 118, 306 

Encircling Mountains See Echoriath. 

Encircling Sea See Ekkaia. 

Endor 'Middle Land', Middle-earth. 101 

Engrnr 'The Sickly 1 , one of the Elvish names for Men, 
119 

Eol Called the Dark Elf; the great smith who dwelt in 
Nan Elmoth, and took Aredhel Turgon's sister to wife; friend 
of the Dwarves; maker of the sword Anglachel (Gurthang); 
father of Maeglin; put to death in Gondolin. 104,158-65, 
247 

Eonvie One of the mightiest of the Maiar; called the 
Herald of Manwe; leader of the host of the Valar in the 
attack on Morgoth at the end of the First Age. 24, 309-14, 
321,353 

Ephel Brandi r 'The encircling fence of Brandir', 
dwellings of the Men of Brethil upon Amon Obel; also called 
the Ephel. 266, 270-2 

Ephel Duath 'Fence of Shadow 1 , the mountain-range 
between Gondor and Mordor; also called the Mountains of 
Shadow. 361-2, 368 

Erchamion 'One-handed', the name of Beren after his 
escape from Angband. 222, 225, 242, 292 

Erech A hill in the west of Gondor, where was the 
Stone of Isildur (see The Return of the KingV 2). 361 

Ered Engrin 'The Iron Mountains' in the far north. 128, 
135-6, 139, 181, 193 

Ered Gorgoroth 'The Mountains of Terror', northward of 
Nan Dungortheb; also called the Gorgoroth. 90, 109, 144, 
157, 176, 198,214,246 

Ered Lindon 'The Mountains of Lindon', another name 
for Ered Luin, the Blue Mountains. 147-8, 160, 167, 174, 
238, 287, 290 

Ered Lomin 'The Echoing Mountains', forming the 
west-fence of Hithlum. 123, 140 

Ered Luin 'The Blue Mountains', also called Ered 



Lindon. After the destruction at the end of the First Age 
Ered Luin formed the north-western coastal range of 
Middle-earth. 56, 103, 107, 132-5, 147, 159, 167, 288, 
354, 359 

Ered Nimrais The White Mountains ( nimrais 'white 
horns'), the great range from east to west south of the Misty 
Mountains. 107 

Ered Wethrin 'The Mountains of Shadow', 'The 
Shadowy Mountains', the great curving range bordering 
Dor-nu-Fauglith (Ard-galen) on the west and forming the 
barrier between Hithlum and West Beleriand. 123-5, 127, 
133, 137, 140-1, 150, 171, 182-3, 193, 206, 212, 232, 
234, 238, 249, 254, 256, 261 , 278, 281 , 295 

Eregion 'Land of Holly 1 (called by Men Hollin ); Noldorin 
realm in the Second Age at the western feet of the Misty 
Mountains, where the Elven Rings were made. 355-7 

Ereinion 'Scion of Kings', the son of Fingon, known 
always by his surname Gil-galad. 186, 239, 302 

Erellont One of the three mariners who accompanied 
Earendil on his voyages. 307 
Eressea See Tol Eressea. 

Eriador The land between the Misty Mountains and the 
Blue, in which lay the Kingdom of Amor (and also the Shire 
of the Hobbits). 55, 56, 104, 174, 330, 360, 366-7, 370, 
376 

Eru 'The One', 'He that is Alone': lluvatar. 3, 4, 17-9, 
23, 41-4, 82, 95, 99, 102, 112-3, 322, 327-8, 332, 335, 
347; also in Children of Eru. 

Esgalduin The river of Doriath, dividing the forests of 
Neldoreth and Region, and flowing into Sirion. The name 
means 'River under Veil'. 105, 144, 157, 199, 225, 269, 
289 

Este One of the Valier, the spouse of Irmo (Lorien); her 
name means 'Rest'. 1 8, 21 ,24, 68, 1 14 

Estolad The land south of Nan Elmoth where the Men 
of the followings of Beor and Marach dwelt after they 
crossed the Blue Mountains into Beleriand; translated in the 
text as 'the Encampment'. 171-5 

Ezellohar The Green Mound of the Two Trees of 
Valinor; also called Corollaire. 33,44, 84, 86 

Faelivrin Name given to Finduilas by Gwindor. 257 



Faithful, The See Elendili. 

Falas The western coasts of Beleriand, south of 
Nevrast. 60, 106, 111, 124, 142, 194,232,239, 259 

Falathar One of the three mariners who accompanied 
Earendil on his voyages. 307 

Falathrim The Telerin Elves of the Falas, whose lord 
was Cirdan. 60 

Falmari The Sea-elves; name of the Teleri who 
departed from Middle-earth and went into the West. 54 
Feanor Eldest son of Finwe (the only child of Finwe 
and Miriel), half-brother of Fingolfin and Finarfin; greatest of 
the Noldor, and leader in their rebellion; deviser of the 
Feanorian script; maker of the Silmarils; slain in Mithrim in 
the Dagor-nuin-Giliath. His name was Curufinwe ( curu 
'skill'), and he gave this name to his fifth son, Curufin; but he 
was himself known always by his mother's name for him, 
Feanaro 'Spirit of Fire', which was given the Sindarin form 
Feanor Chapters V-IX and XIII passim; see especially 63, 
67-9, 71, 112. Elsewhere his name occurs chiefly in the 
sons of Feanor. 

Feanturi 'Masters of Spirits', the Valar Namo 
(Mandos) and Irmo (Lorien). 21 

Felagund The name by which King Finrod was known 
after the establishment of Nargothrond; it was Dwarvish in 
origin ( felak-gundu 'cave-hewer', but translated in the text 
as 'Lord of Caves', 61 ). For references see Finrod. 

Finarfin The third son of Finwe, the younger of 
Feanor's half-brothers; remained in Aman after the Exile of 
the Noldor and ruled the remnant of his people in Tlrion. 
Alone among the Noldorin princes he and his descendants 
had golden hair, derived from his mother Indis, who was a 
Vanyarin Elf (see Vanyar). 63, 69, 75. 93-6, 100, 117, 202, 
213, 310. Many other occurrences of the name of Finarfin 
relate to his sons or his people. 

Finduilas Daughter of Orodreth, loved by Gwindor; 
captured in the sack of Nargothrond, and killed by Ores at 
the Crossings of Teiglin. 257-9, 261-6,277 

Fingolfin The second son of Finwe, the elder of 
Feanor's half-brothers; High King of the Noldor in 
Beleriand, dwelling in Hithlum; slain by Morgoth in single 
combat, 63, 69, 74-7, 83, 93-5, vl 00-2, 115, 123, 126-8, 



129, 133, 135-6, 140, 144, 154, 171, 177, 180-1, 183-7, 
240. Many other occurrences of the name of Fingolfin relate 
to his sons or his people. 

Fingon The eldest son of Fingolfin, called the Valiant; 
rescued Maedhros from Thangorodrim; High King of the 
Noldor after the death of his father; slain by Gothmog in the 
Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 64, 94-6, 98, 101, 128-9, 137, 140, 
144, 156, 166, 183, 186, 194, 198, 231-9, 302, 354 

Finrod The eldest son of Finarfin, called 'the Faithful' 
and 'the Friend of Men'. Founder and King of Nargothrond, 
whence his name Felagund; encountered in. Ossiriand the 
first Men to cross the Blue Mountains; rescued by Barahir in 
the Dagor Bragollach; redeemed his oath to Barahir by 
accompanying Beren on his quest; slain in defence of 
Beren in the dungeons of Tol-in-Gaurhoth. The following 
references include those to Felagund used alone: 64, 93, 
96, 102, 127, 130, 133-4, 142-6, 148, 151, 154-5, 167-72, 
176, 178, 182-3, 193, 197, 201-13, 223, 250, 259, 261, 
264, 267-8, 284-5, 287 

Finwe Leader of the Noldor on the westward journey 
from Cuivienen; King of the Noldor in Aman; father of 
Feanor, Fingolfin, and Finarfin, slain by Morgoth at 
Formenos. 53-6, 60-71, 75-8, 83, 87, 92, 152; other 
references are to his sons or his house. 

Flrimar'Mortals', one of the Elvish names for Men. 119 

Firstborn, The The Elder Children of lluvatar, the Elves. 
7, 9, 13, 34, 37-8, 41-2, 44, 48, 309, 315, 321, 325, 355, 
370, 378 

Follov\ers, The The Younger Children of lluvatar, Men; 
translation of Hildor. 7 

Ford of Stones See Sam Athrad. 

Fords ofAros See Arossiach. 

Formenos 'Northern Fortress', the stronghold of 
Feanor and his sons in the north of Valinor, built after the 
banishment of Feanor from Tirion. 79, 83, 88, 152 

Fomost 'Northern Fortress'. Numenorean city on the 
North Downs in Eriador. 361 

Forsaken Elves See Eglath. 

Frodo The Ringbearer. 377 

FuinurA renegade Numenorean who became mighty 
among the Haradrim at the end of the Second Age, 363 



Gabilgathol See Belegost. 104 
Galadriel Daughter of Finarfin and sister of Finrod 
Felagund; one of the leaders of the Noldorin rebellion 
against the Valar; wedded Celeborn of Doriath and with 
him remained in Middle-earth after the end of the First Age; 
keeper of Nenya, the Ring of Water, in Lothlorien. 64, 93-4, 
102, 134-5, 151-3, 155, 172, 204, 290, 315, 370-3 

Galathilion The White Tree of Tirion, the image of 
Telperion made by Yavanna for the Vanyar and the Noldor' 
62, 324, 361 

Galdor Called the Tall; son of Hador Lorindol and lord 
of Dor-lomin after him; father of Hurin and Huor; slain at 
Eithel Sirion. 1 77, 1 83, 1 87, 1 90-3, 242, 257, 284, 31 1 
galvom The metal devised by Eol. 1 59 
Gandalf The name among Men of Mithrandir, (the of 
the Istari (Wizards); see Olorin. 372 

Gates of Summer A great festival of Gondolin, on the 
eve of which the city was assaulted 'by the forces of 
Morgoth. 300 

Gelion The great river of East Beleriand, rising in 
Himring and Mount Rerir and fed by the rivers of Ossiriand 
flowing down from the Blue Mountains. 56-7, 103-4, 109, 
132, 144-8, 167, 170, 174, 184, 229, 287-90 

Gelmir (I) Elf of Nargothrond, brother of Gwindor, 
captured in the Dagor Bragollach and afterwards put to 
death in front of Eithel Sirion, as a provocation to its 
defenders, before the Nirnaeth Amoediad. 230, 233 

Gelmir (2) Elf of the people of Angrod, who with 
Arminas came to Nargothrond to warn Orodreth of its peril. 
260 

Gildor One of the twelve companions of Barahir on 
Dorthonion. 187 

Gil-Estel 'Star of Hope', Sindarin name for Earendil 
bearing the Silmaril in his ship Vingilot. 310 

Gil-galad 'Star of Radiance', the name by which 
Ereinion son of Fingon was afterwards known. After the 
death of Turgon he became the last High King of the Noldor 
in Middle-earth, and remained in Lindon after the end of the 
First Age; leader with Elendil of the Last Alliance of Men 
and Elves and slain with him in combat with Sauron. 186, 
239, 302, 305, 315, 330-1 , 335, 359-60, 362-5, 369-70 



Gimilkhad Younger son of Ar-Gimilzor and Inzilbeth 
and father of Ar-Pharazon, the last King of Numenor. 332 
GimilzdrSee Ar-Gimilzor. 

Ginglith River in West Beleriand flowing into the Narog 
above Nargothrond. 204, 261 

Gladden Fields Partial translation of Loeg Ningloron; 
the great stretches of reeds and iris (gladden) in and about 
the Anduin, where Isildur was slain and the One Ring lost 
367, 374 

Glaurung The first of the Dragons of Morgoth, called 
the Father of Dragons; in the Dagor Bragollach, the 
Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and the Sack of Nargothrond; cast his 
spell upon Turin and upon Nienor; slain by Turin at Cabed- 
en-Aras. Called also the Great Worm and the Worm of 
Morgoth. 137, 177, 181-2, 184, 235-6, 261-5, 268, 271-9, 
283-4, 296, 300 

Glingal 'Hanging Flame', the image of Laurelin made 
byTurgon in Gondolin. 151 

Glirhuin A minstrel of Brethil. 283-4 
Gloredhel Daughter of Hador Lorindol of Dor-lomin 
and sister of Galdor; wedded Haldir of Brethil. 190 

Glorfindel Elf of Gondolin, who fell to his death in Cirith 
Thoronath in combat with a Balrog after the escape from 
the sack of the city. The name means 'Golden-haired'. 237, 
301-2 

Golodhrim The Noldor. Golodh was the Sindarin form 
of Quenya Noldo, and -rim a collective plural ending; cf. 
Annon-in-Gelydh, the Gate of the Noldor. 160 

Gondolin The Hidden Rock' (see Ondolinde), secret 
city of King Turgon surrounded by the Encircling Mountains 
(Echoriath). 64, 125, 150-1, 157, 186, 191-3, 221, 231-2, 
234, 237, 240, 252, 281-2, 295-302, 305, 315, 322 

Gondolindrim The people of Gondolin. 166, 192, 234 
Gondor 'Land of Stone', name of the southern 
Numenorean kingdom in Middle-earth, established by 
Isildur and Anarion. 361-9, 376-7. City of Gondor: Minas 
Tirith. 377 

Gonnhirhm 'Masters of Stone', a Sindarin name for 
the Dwarves. 1 03 

Gorgoroth (1) See Ered Gorgoroth. 

Gorgoroth (2) A plateau in Mordor, between the 



converging Mountains of Shadow and Mountains of Ash. 
363, 365, 368 

Gorlim Called the Unhappy; one of the twelve 
companions of Barahir on Dorthonion, who was ensnared 
by a phantom of his wife Eilinel and revealed to Sauron the 
hiding-place of Barahir. 187, 195-7 

Gorthaur The name of Sauron in Sindarin. 26,187, 353 
Gorthol 'Dread Helm', the name that Turin took as one 
of the Two Captains in the land of Dor-Cuarthol. 252 

Gothmog Lord of Balrogs, high-captain of Angband, 
slayer of Feanor, Fingon, and Ecthelion. (The same name 
was borne in the Third Age by the Lieutenant of Minas 
Morgul, The Return of the King V 6.) 125, 236, 238, 300 
Greater Gel ion One of the two tributary branches of the 
river Gelion in the north, rising in Mount Rerir. 146 
Great Lands Middle-earth. 324 
Great River See Anduin. 

Green-elves Translation of Laiquendi; the Nandorin 
Elves of Ossiriand. For their origin see 107, and for the 
name 110, 133, 147-8, 167,170, 184,238,291 

Greenwood the Great The great forest east of the 
Misty Mountains, afterwards named Mirkwood. 360, 366, 
371-2,375 

Grey-elven tongue See Sindarin. 

Grey-elves See Sindar. 

Grey Havens See (The) Havens, Mithlond. 
Greymantle See Singollo, Thingol. 

Grinding Ice See Helcaraxe. 

Grond The great mace of Morgoth, with which he 
fought Fingolfin; called the Hammer of the Underworld. The 
battering-ram used against the Gate of Minas Tirith was 
named after it ( The Return of the King V 4). 1 85 
Guarded Plain See Talath Dimen. 

Guarded Realm See Valinor. 82, 98 
Guilin Father of Gelmir and Gwindor, Elves of 
Nargothrond. 230, 233, 253, 256, 261 

Gundor Younger son of Hador Lorindol, lord of Dor- 
lomin; slain with his father at Eithel Sirion in the Dagor 
Bragollach. 177, 183,311 

Gurthang 'Iron of Death', name of Beleg's sword 



Anglachel after it was reforged for Turin in Nargothrond, 
and from which he was named Mormegil. 258, 262, 265-6, 
273, 276-8 

Gmith-i-Mirdain 'People of the Jewel-smiths', name of 
the fellowship of craftsmen in Eregion, greatest of whom 
was Celebrimbor son of Curufin. 354-5 

Gwndor Elf of Nargothrond, brother of Gelmir; 
enslaved in Angband, but escaped and aided Beleg in the 
rescue of Turin; brought Turin to Nargothrond; loved 
Finduilas Orodreth's daughter; slain in the Battle or 
Tumhalad. 230, 232-4, 254-61 

Hadhodrond The Sindarin name of Khazad-dum 
(Moria). 104,354 

Hador Called Lorindol 'Goldenhead', also Hador the 
Golden-haired; lord of Dor-lomin, vassal of Fingolfin; father 
of Galdor father of Hurin; slain at Eithel Sirion in the Dagor 
Bragollach. The House of Hador was called the Third 
House of the Edain. 177-8, 183, 187, 190, 193. House of, 
People of, Hador 177, 189-90, 194, 231, 237-9, 243, 253, 
265, 280, 308. Helm of Hador: see Dragon-helm of Dor- 
lomin. 

Haladin The second people of Men to enter Beleriand; 
afterwards called the People of Haleth, dwelling in the 
Forest of Brethil, also the Men ofBrethil. 171, 174-5, 187, 
190, 194,234,238 

Haldad Leader of the Haladin in their defence against 
the attack on them by Ores in Thargelion, and slain there; 
father of the Lady Haleth. 1 74-6 

Haldan Son of Haidar; leader of the Haladin after the 
death of the Lady Haleth. 175 

Haidar Son of Haldad of the Haladin, and brother of 
the Lady Haleth; slain with his father in the Ore-raid on 
Thargelion. 175-6 

Haldir Son of Halmir of Brethil; wedded Gidredhel, 
daughter of Hador of Dor-lomin; slain in the Nirnaeth 
Arnoediad. 190, 231-2, 234, 238 

Haleth Called the Lady Haleth; leader of the Haladin 
(who were named from her the People of Haleth) from 
Thargelion to the lands west of Sirion. 175-6. House of, 
People of, Haleth 175-8, 190, 231 , 266, 272-3 

Half-elven Translation of Sindarin Peredhel, plural 



Peredhil, applied to Elrond and Elros, 304, 315, 322, 354, 
357; and to Earendil, 298 

Halflings Translation of Periannath (Hobbits). 377 
Halls ofAmiting The Halls of Mandos. 72 
Halmir Lord of the Haladin, son of Haldan; with Beleg 
of Doriath defeated the Ores that came south from the 
Pass of Sirion after the Dagor Bragollach. 190, 231 

Handir Son of Haldir and Gloredhel, father of Brandir 
the Lame; lord of the Haladin after Haldir's death; slain in 
Brethil in battle with Ores. 238, 260, 266 

Haradrim The Men of Harad ('the South'), the lands 
south of Mordor. 363 

Hareth Daughter of Helmir of Brethil; wedded Galdor 
of Dor-lomin; mother of Hurin and Huor. 190, 194 

Hathaldir Called the Young; one of the twelve 
companions of Barahiron Dorthonion. 187 
Hathol Father of Hador Lorindol. 1 77 
Haudh-en-An/\en 'The Ladybarrow', the burial-mound 
of Haleth in the Forest of Brethil. 1 76 

Haudh-en-Elleth The mound in which Finduilas was 
buried, near the Crossings of Teiglin. 267, 270-1, 275, 277 
Haudh-en-Ndengin 'The Mound of Slain' in the desert 
of Anfauglith, where were piled the bodies of the Elves and 
Men that died in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 241-2 

Haudh-en-Nimaeth 'The Mound of Tears', another 
name of Haudh-en-Ndengin. 241 

Havens, The Brithombar and Eglarest on the coast of 
Beleriand: 124, 133, 144, 186, 239. The Havens of Sirion 
at the end of the First Age: 294, 305, 313. The Grey 
Havens ( Mithlond) in the Gulf of Lhun: 359, 370-1, 378. 
Alqualonde, the Haven of the Swans or Swanhaven, is also 
called simply The Haven: 97, 101 

Helcar The Inland Sea in the northeast of Middle-earth, 
where once stood the mountain of the lamp of llluin; the 
mere of Cuivienen where the first Elves awoke is described 
as a bay in this sea. 48, 54 

Helcaraxe The strait between Araman and Middle- 
earth; also referred to as the Grinding Ice. 51-2, 60, 88, 
100-1, 126, 136, 154, 160 

Helevorn 'Black Glass', a lake in the north of 
Thargelion, below Mount Rerir, where Caranthir dwelt. 132, 



148, 184 

Helluin The star Sirius. 48, 69 
Herumor A renegade Numenorean who became 
mighty among the Haradrim at the end of the Second Age. 
363 

Herunumen 'Lord of the West', Quenya name of Ar- 
Adunakhor. 330 

Hidden Kingdom Name given both to Doriath, 135, 
198, 200,277, and to Gondolin, 156,298 
High-elven See Quenya. 

High Elves See Eldar. 370 
High Faroth See Taur-en-Faroth. 

Hildor The Followers', 'The Aftercomers', Elvish name 
for Men, as the Younger Children of lluvatar. 1 14, 1 19 

Hildorien The land in the east of Middle-earth where 
the first Men (Hildor) awoke. 120, 169 

Himlad 'Cool Plain', the region where Celegorm and 
Curufin dwelt south of the Pass ofAglon. 147, 158, 161 
Himring The great hill west of Maglor's Gap on which 
was the stronghold of Maedhros; translated in the text as 
'Ever-cold'. 131,147-8,157, 183-4,214,223,231 

Hirilom The great beech-tree in Doriath with three 
trunks, in which Luthien was imprisoned. The name means 
'Tree of the Lady 1 . 208, 226 

Hisilome 'Land of Mist', Quenya name of Hithlum. 140 
Hithaeglir 'Line of Misty Peaks': the Misty Mountains, 
or Mountains of Mist. (The form Hithaeglin on the map to 
The Lord of the Rings is an error.) 55, 104, 107, 360, 364, 
366 

Hither Lands Middle-earth (also called the Outer 
Lands). 57, 59-61 , 296, 304, 311,31 5, 323, 371 

Hithlum 'Land of Mist' (see 140), the region bounded 
on the east and south by Ered Wethrin and on the west by 
Ered Lomin; see Hisilome. 52, 90, 123, 126-8, 130, 137, 
140-1, 144, 146, 157, 171, 181-9, 193, 221, 231-4, 238-9, 
242-4,254,280,281,294-5 
Hollin See Eregion. 354 

Hollovibold Translation of Nogrod: 'hollow dwelling' 
(early English bold, noun related to the verb build). 104 
Huan The great wolfhound of Valinor that Orome gave 



to Celegorm; friend and helper of Beren and Luthien; slew 
and slain by Carcharoth. The name means 'great dog, 
hound'. 209-18, 222, 225-6 

Hunthor A Man of the Haladin in Brethil who 
accompanied Turin in his attack on Glaurung at Cabed-en- 
Aras and was killed there by a falling stone. 273 

Huor Son of Galdor of Dor-lomin, husband of Rian and 
father of Tuor; went to Gondolin with Hurin his brother; slain 
in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 150, 177, 190, 232, 236, 237, 
242,294,296,298,301,311 

Hurin Called Thalion 'the Steadfast', 'the Strong'; son 
of Galdor of Dor-lomin, husband of Morwen and father of 
Turin and Nienor; lord of Dor-lomin, vassal of Fingon. Went 
with Huor his brother to Gondolin; captured by Morgoth in 
the Nirnaeth Arnoediad and set upon Thangorodrim for 
many years; after his release slew MTm in Nargothrond and 
brought the Nauglamir to King Thingol. 150, 177, 191-4, 
232-46, 252, 255-9, 261-7, 271, 274-6, 278-87, 294, 298, 
311 

Hyarmentir The highest mountain in the regions south 
of Valinor. 81 

lant laur 'The Old Bridge' over the Esgalduin on the 
northern borders of Doriath; also called the Bridge of 
Esgalduin, 144-5, 157 

Ibun One of the sons of Mim the Petty-dwarf. 249, 251- 

2 

Idril Called Celebrindal 'Silverfoot'; the daughter (and 
only child) of Turgon and Elenwe; wife of Tuor, mother of 
Earendil, with whom she escaped from Gondolin to the 
Mouths of Sirion; departed thence with Tuor into the West 
151, 160, 163, 165-6, 296-300, 303-4, 308, 315,322 

llluin One of the Lamps of the Valar made by Aule. 
Illuin stood in the northern part of Middle-earth, and after the 
overthrow of the mountain by Melkor the Inland Sea of 
Helcar was formed there. 30-1 , 48, 59 

llmare A Maia, the handmaid of Varda, 24 
Ilmen The region above the air where the stars are. 
116-9,349 

lluvatar 'Father of All, Eru. 3-11, 17-8, 23, 25, 34-42, 
46-50, 58, 70, 73, 74, 86, 93, 102, 121, 227, 313, 322-3, 
326-7, 336, 344-5 



Imlach Father of Amlach. 173 
Imladris 'Rivendell' (literally, 'Deep Dale of the Cleft'), 
Elrond's dwelling in a valley of the Misty Mountains. 282, 
364, 367-70, 377 

Indis Vanya rin Elf, close kin of Ingwe; second wife of 
Finwe, mother of Fingolfin and Finarfin. 63, 69-70, 75 

Ingvie Leader of the Vanyar, the first of the three hosts 
of the Eldar on the westward journey from Cuivienen. In 
Aman he dwelt upon Taniquetil, and was held High King of 
all the Elves. 53-4, 60, 62, 65, 69, 1 1 7, 31 0 

Inziladun Elder son of Ar-Gimilzor and Inzilbeth; 
afterwards named Tar-Pal anti r. 332 

Inzilbeth Queen of Ar-Gimilzor; of the house of the 
lords of And uni e. 331 

Irmo The Vala usually named Lorien, the place of his 
dwelling. Irmo means 'Desirer' or 'Master of Desire'. 21, 
24,68 

Iron Mountains See Ered Engrin. 

Isengard Translation (to represent the language of 
Rohan) of the Elvish name Angrenost. 361 , 373-7 
Isil Quenya name of the Moon. 114-5 
Isildur Elder son of Elendil, who with his father and his 
brother Anarion escaped from the Drowning of Numenor 
and founded in Middle-earth the Numenorean realms in 
exile; lord of Minas Ithil; cut the Ruling Ring from Sauron's 
hand; slain by Ores in the Anduin when the Ring slipped 
from his finger. 337, 342, 346, 360-8, 374. Heirs of Isildur 
369, 373. Heir of lsildur=Aragom 377 

Istari The Wizards. See Curunir, Saruman; 
Mithrandir, Gandalf, Oldrin; Radagast. 372 

Ivrin The lake and falls beneath Ered Wethrin where 
the river Narog rose. 140, 257. Pools of Ivrin 132, 257, 
264, 296. Falls of Ivrin 142, 206. See Eithel Ivrin. 

kelvar An Elvish word retained in the speeches of 
Yavanna and Manwe in Chapter II: 'animals, living things 
that move'. 43-4 

Kementari 'Queen of the Earth', a title of Yavanna. 21 , 
33-5, 44 

Khazad The name of the Dwarves in their own 
language ( Khuzdul ). 103 



Khazad-dum The great mansions of the Dwarves of 
Durin's race in the Misty Mountains (Hadhodrond, Moria). 
See Khazad; dum is probably a plural or collective, 
meaning 'excavations, halls, mansions'. 42, 104, 354 

Khtm Son of MTm the Petty-dwarf, slam by one of 
Turin's outlaw band. 249 

King's Men Numenoreans hostile to the Eldar and the 
Elendili. 328-9, 332 

Kinslaying, The The slaying of the Teleri by the Noldor 
at Alqualonde. 98, 100-1, 120, 130, 152, 154, 166, 169, 
188 

Ladros The lands to the northeast of Dorthonion that 
were granted by the Noldorin Kings to the Men of the 
House of Beor. 1 77 

LaerCu Beleg 'The Song of the Great Bow', made by 
Turin at Eithel Ivrin in memory of Beleg Cuthalion. 256 
Laiquendi 'The Green-elves' of Ossiriand. 110 
Lalaith 'Laughter 1 , daughter of Hurin and Morwen who 
died in childhood. 242 

Lammoth 'The Great Echo', region north of the Firth of 
Drengist, named from the echoes of Morgoth's cry in his 
struggle with Ungoliant. 89-90, 123 
Land of ShadowSee Mordor. 

Land of the Dead that Live See DorFim-i-Guinar. 
Land of the Star Numenor. 339, 341 
Lanthir Lamath 'Waterfall of Echoing Voices', where 
Dior had his house in Ossiriand, and after which his 
daughter Elwing ('Star-spray 1 ) was named. 289 

Last Alliance The league made at the end of the 
Second Age between Elendil and Gil-galad to defeat 
Sauron. 364 

Laurelin 'Song of Gold', the younger of the Two Trees 
ofValinor.34,64,82, 114-6, 151 

Lay of Leith i an The long poem concerning the lives of 
Beren and Luthien from which the prose account in The 
Silmarillion was derived. Leithian is translated 'Release 
from Bondage'. 195, 198, 203, 206-8, 226 

Legolin The third of the tributaries of Gelion in 
Ossiriand. 147 

lembas Sindarin name of the waybread of the Eldar 
(from earlier lennmbass 'journey-bread'; in Quenya coimas 



'life-bread'). 247, 251 , 256 

Lenv\e The leader of the Elves from the host of the 
Teleri who refused to cross the Misty Mountains on the 
west-ward journey from Cuivienen (the Nandor); father of 
Denethor. 56, 108 

Lhun River in Eriador flowing into the sea in the Gulf of 
Lhun.354, 360 

Linaevien 'Lake of birds', the great mere in Nevrast. 
141 

Lindon A name of Ossiriand in the First Age; see 147. 
After the tumults at the end of the First Age the name 
Lindon was retained for the lands west of the Blue 
Mountains that still remained above the Sea: 354, 355, 
359, 370 

Undone Mother of Inzilbeth. 331 

Little Gel ion One of the two tributary branches of the 
river Gelion in the north, rising in the Hill of Himring. 146 

Loeg Ningloron 'Pools of the golden water-flowers'; 
see Gladden Fields. 

lomelindi Quenya word meaning 'dusk-singers', 
nightingales. 57 

Lomion 'Son of Twilight', the Quenya name that 
Aredhel gave to Maeglin. 159 

Lonely Isle See Tol Eressea. 

Lord of Waters See Ulmo. 

Lords of the West See Valar. 

Lorellin The lake in Lorien in Valinor where the Vala 
Este sleeps by day. 21 

Lorgan Chief of the Easterling Men in Hithlum after the 
Nirnaeth Arnoediad, by whom Tuor was enslaved. 294 

Lorien (1) The name of the gardens and dwelling- 
place of the Vala Irmo, who was himself usually called 
Lorien. 18,21,24,57,68, 106, 114,289 

Lorien (2) The land ruled by Celeborn and Galadriel 
between the rivers Celebrant and Anduin. Probably the 
original name of this land was altered to the form of the 
Quenya name Lorien of the gardens of the Vala Irmo in 
Valinor. In Lothlorien the Sindarin word loth 'flower' is 
prefixed. 370 

Lorindol 'Goldenhead'; see Hador. 

Losgar The place of the burning of the ships of the 



Teleri by Feanor, at the mouth of the Firth of Drengist, 101, 
111,123,127,140,152,154 

Lothlann The wide and empty 1 , the great plain north of 
the March of Maedhros. 147, 184, 255 

Lothlorien 'Lorien of the Blossom'; see Lorien (2). 370 
Luinil Name of a star (one shining with a blue light). 48 
Lumbar Name of a star. 48 

Luthien The daughter of King Thingol and Melian the 
Maia, who after the fulfilment of the Quest of the Silmaril 
and the death of Beren chose to become mortal and to 
share his fate. See Tinuviel. 103, 108, 147, 177, 195, 199- 
203, 208-30, 242, 290-2, 305, 309, 315, 322 

Mablung Elf of Doriath, chief captain of Thingol, friend 
of Turin; called 'of the Heavy Hand' (which is the meaning of 
the name Mablung )\ slain in Menegroth by the Dwarves. 
133, 224-6, 230, 244, 267-9, 277-8, 284, 289-90 

Maedhros The eldest son of Feanor, called the Tall; 
rescued by Fingon from Thangorodrim; held the Hill of 
Himring and the lands about; formed the Union of 
Maedhros that ended in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad; bore one 
of the Silmarils with him to his death at the end of the First 
Age. 63, 93, 126-32, 135-6, 140, 144-8, 167, 171, 184, 
189, 214, 229-35, 239, 292, 305, 310, 313-4 

Maeglin 'Sharp Glance', son of Eol and Aredhel 
Turgon's sister, born in Nan Elmoth; became mighty in 
Gondolin, and betrayed it to Morgoth; slain in the sack of 
the city byTuor. See Lomion. 104, 159-66, 192, 237, 247, 
297-9 

Maglor The second son of Feanor, a great singer and 
minstrel; held the lands called Maglor's Gap; at the end of 
the First Age seized with Maedhros the two Silmarils that 
remained in Middle-earth, and cast the one that he took into 
the Sea. 63, 93, 98, 133, 135, 138, 148, 167, 184, 222, 
236, 305-6,310,313-4 

Maglor's Gap The region between the northern arms 
of Gelion where there were no hills of defence against the 
North. 135,148,184 

Magor Son of Malach Aradan; leader of the Men of the 
following of Marach who entered West Beleriand. 1 72, 1 77 
Mahal The name given to Aule by the Dwarves. 42 
Mahanaxar The Ring of Doom outside the gates of 


Valmar, in which were set the thrones of the Valar where 
they sat in council. 33, 50, 52, 77, 86-8, 91, 95, 112 

Mahtan A great smith of the Noldor, father of Nerdanel 
the wife of Feanor. 69, 75 

Maiar Ainur of lesser degree than the Valar (singular 
Maia). 11, 23-6, 30, 57, 61, 83, 91, 105, 108, 111, 114, 
229, 289, 292, 322, 353 

Malach Son of Marach; given the Elvish name Aradan. 
171,177 

Malduin A tributary of the Teiglin; the name probably 
means 'Yellow River'. 251 

Malinalda 'Tree of Gold', a name of Laurelin. 33 
Mandos The place of the dwelling in Aman of the Vala 
properly called Namo, the Judge, though this name was 
seldom used, and he himself was usually referred to as 
Mandos. Named as Vala: 18, 21-3,47, 52, 70, 73, 77-8, 87, 
98, 113, 118, 121, 129-30, 154, 227, 308, 316. Named as 
the place of his dwelling (including Halls of Mandos; also 
Halls ofAmiting, Houses of the Dead): 22, 38, 42, 52, 61 , 
68-9, 73, 99, 121, 125, 227, 289. With reference to the 
Doom of the Noldor and the Curse of Mandos: 150, 154-5, 
166, 169,201,205,213,297 

Manvie The chief of the Valar, called also Sulimo, the 
Elder King, the Ruler ofArda. Passim; see especially 1 1 , 
18-9, 35,70, 129 

Marach Leader of the third host of Men to enter 
Beleriand, ancestor of Hador Lorindol. 171-2, 180 

March of Maedhros The open lands to the north of the 
headwaters of the river Gelion, held by Maedhros and his 
brothers against attack on East Beleriand; also called the 
eastern March. 131-2, 147 

Mardil Called the Faithful; the first Ruling Steward of 
Gondor. 369 

Mar-nu-Falmar'The Land under the Waves', name of 
Numenor after the Downfall. 347 

Melian A Maia, who left Valinor and came to Middle- 
earth; afterwards the Queen of King Thingol in Doriath, 
about which she set a girdle of enchantment, the Girdle of 
Melian; mother of Luthien, and foremother of Elrond and 
Elros. 24-5, 57-8, 61, 103-6, 109, 110-1, 121, 130, 135, 
144-5, 151-4, 158, 172, 176, 182, Chapter XIX passim, 



229-30, Chapters XXI, XXII passim, 315, 322 

Melkor The Quenya name for the great rebellious 
Vala, the beginning of evil, in his origin the mightiest of the 
Ainur; afterwards named Morgoth, Bauglir, the Dark Lord, 
the Enemy, etc. The meaning of Melkor was 'He who 
arises in Might'; the Sindarin form was Belegur, but it was 
never used, save in a deliberately altered form Belegurth 
'Great Death'. Passim (after the rape of the Silmarils 
usually called Morgoth); see especially 4-5, 8, 25, 50, 51, 
70-1,90-2, 117,251,320 

Men See especially 37-8, 74,119-21,167-70, 178, 
319-20, 326-7; and see also Atani, Children of II uvatar, 
Easterlings. 

Menegroth 'The Thousand Caves', the hidden halls of 
Thingol and Melian on the river Esgalduin in Doriath; see 
especially 58, 106-8, 111-2, 125, 130, 134, 145, 155, 200, 
203, 208, 217, 222-6, 229, 243-7, 252, 267, 269, 286-91 
Meneldil Son of Anarion, King of Gondor. 368 
Menelmacar 'Swordsman of the Sky 1 , the constellation 
Orion. 48 

Meneltarma 'Pillar of Heaven', the mountain in the 
midst of Numenor, upon whose summit was the Hallow of 
Eru lluvatar. 322-4, 329, 332-3, 336, 343, 345, 348 
Meres of Twilight See Aelin-uial. 

Mereth Aderthad The 'Feast of Reuniting' held by 
Fingolfin near the Pools of Ivrin. 1 32-3 

Mickleburg Translation of Belegost: 'great fortress'. 
104 

Middle-earth The lands to the east of the Great Sea; 
also called the Hither Lands, the Outer Lands, the Great 
Lands, and Endor. Passim. 

Mim The Petty-dwarf, in whose house ( Bar-en - 
Danwedh) on Amon Rudh Turin dwelt with the outlaw band, 
and by whom their lair was betrayed to the Ores; slain by 
Hurin in Nargothrond. 248-53, 284 

Minas Anor 'Tower of the Sun' (also simply Anor), 
afterwards called Minas Tirith; the city of Anarion, at the 
feet of Mount Mindolluin. 361-2, 365-8, 377 

Minas Ithil 'Tower of the Moon' afterwards called 
Minas Morgul; the city of Isildur, built on a shoulder of the 



Ephel Duath. 361-2,368 

Minas Morgul Tower of Sorcery 1 (also simply Morgul), 
name of Minas Ithil after its capture by the Ringwraiths. 
368-9, 377 

Minastir See Tar-Mi nastir. 

Minas Tirith (1) Tower of Watch', built by F inrod 
Felagund on Tol Sirion; see Tol-in-Gaurhoth. 142, 187-9, 
251 

Minas Tirith (2) Later name of Minas Anor. 297. 
Called the City of Gondor. 377 

Mindeb A tributary of Sirion, between Dimbar and the 
Forest of Neldoreth. 144, 246 

Mindolluin Towering Blue-head', the great mountain 
behind Minas Anor. 361 , 377 

Mindon Eldalieva 'Lofty Tower of the Eldalie', the 
tower of Ingwe in the city of Tirion; also simply the Mindon. 
62,76,91,96,100 

Miriel (1) The first wife of Finwe, mother of Feanor; 
died after Feanor's birth. Called Serinde 'the Broideress', 
63, 67-8, 75 

Miriel (2) Daughter of Tar-Palantir, forced into 
marriage by Ar-Pharazon, and as his queen named Ar- 
Zimraphel; also called Tar-Miriel. 345-6 
Mirkmod See Greenwood the Great. 

Misty Mountains See Hithaeglir. 

Mithlond The Grey Havens', harbours of the Elves on 
the Gulf of Lhun; also referred to as the Havens. 354, 359, 
371,378 

Mithrandir' The Grey Pilgrim', Elvish name of Gandalf 
(Olorin), one of the Istari (Wizards). 373-7 

Mithrim The name of the great lake in the east of 
Hithlum, and also of the region about it and of the 
mountains to the west, separating Mithrim from Dor-lomin. 
The name was originally that of the Sindarin Elves who 
dwelt there. 124-8, 131, 242, 294 

Mordor The Black Land', also called the Land of 
Shadow Sauron's realm east of the mountains of the Ephel 
Duath. 330, 347, 357, 360-8, 376 

Morgoth The Black Enemy 1 , name of Melkor, first given 
to him by Feanor after the rape of the Silmarils. 26, 71 , 88 



and thereafter passim. See Melkor. 

Morgul See Minas Morgul 

Moria The Black Chasm', later name for Khazad-dum 
(Hadhodrond). 104, 354, 357, 364 

Moriquendi 'Elves of the Darkness'; see Dark Elves. 
54,58, 103, 125 

Mormegil 'The Black Sword', name given to Turin as 
captain of the host of Nargothrond; see Gurthang. 258-9, 
265-7,271,275,278 

Momen Daughter of Baragund (nephew of Barahir, the 
father of Beren); wife of Hurin and mother of Turin and 
Nienor; called Eledhvien (translated in the text as 
'Elfsheen') and the LadyofDor-lomin. 178, 187, 194, 241- 
3, 258-60, 264-5, 267-9, 277, 280, 283, 285 

Mountain of Fire See Orodruin. 

Mountains: ofAman, of Defence, see Pelori; of the 
East, see Orocami; of Iron, see Ered Engrin; of Mist, see 
Hithaeglir; of Mithrim, see Mithrim; of Shadow see Ered 
Wethrin and Ephel Duath; of Terror, see Ered Gorgoroth. 

Mount Doom See Amon Amarth. 

Music of the AinurSee Ainu! indale. 

NaharThe horse of the Vala Orome, said by the Eldar 
to be so named on account of his voice. 22, 37, 49-50, 54, 
85, 108 

Namo A Vala, one of the Aratar; usually named 
Mandos, the place of his dwelling. Namo means 'Ordainer, 
Judge'. 21 

Nandor Said to mean 'Those who turn back': the 
Nandor were those Elves from the host of the Teleri who 
refused to cross the Misty Mountains on the westward 
journey from Cuivienen, but of whom a part, led by 
Denethor, came long afterwards over the Blue Mountains 
and dwelt in Ossiriand (the Green-elves). 55, 107, 146, 244 

Nan Dungortheb Also Dungortheb; translated in the 
text as 'Valley of Dreadful Death'. The valley between the 
precipices of Ered Gorgoroth and the Girdle of Melian. 90, 
144,157,198,214 

Nan Elmoth The forest east of the river Celon where 
Elwe (Thingol) was enchanted by Melian and lost; 
afterwards the dwelling-place of Eol. 58, 61, 104, 158-62, 
170,247,289 



Nan-tathren 'Willow-vale', translated as 'the Land of 
Willows', where the river Narog flowed into Sirion. In 
Treebeard's song in The Two Tov\ers III 4 Quenya forms of 
the name are used: in the wllow-meads of Tasarinan; 
Nan-tasarion. 142, 239, 301-2 

Nargothrond 'The great underground fortress on the 
river Narog', founded by Finrod Felagund and destroyed by 
Glaurung; also the realm of Nargothrond extending east 
and west of the Narog. 134-5, 142-6, 151, 155, 167, 170, 
176, 182-3, 188-9, 193, 203-7, 210, 214, 223, 230, 232-4, 
239, Chapter XXI passim, 284-5, 287, 295, 297, 354 
Nam i Hin Hurin 'The Tale of the Children of Hurin', the 
long lay from which Chapter XXI was derived; ascribed to 
the poet Dirhavel, a Man who lived at the Havens of Sirion 
in the days of Earendil and perished in the attack of the 
sons of Feanor. Nam signifies a tale made in verse, but to 
be spoken and not sung, 243 

Narog The chief river of West Beleriand, rising at Ivrin 
under Ered Wethrin and flowing into Sirion in Nan-tathren. 
109, 133-4, 142, 145, 203-6, 268, 284 

Narsil The sword of Elendil, made by Telchar of 
Nogrod, that was broken when Elendil died in combat with 
Sauron; from the shards it was reforged for Aragom and 
named Anduril. 364-5 

Narsilion The Song of the Sun and Moon. 113 
Narya One of the Three Rings of the Elves, the Ring of 
Fire or the Red Ring; borne by Cirdan and afterwards by 
Mithrandir. 357, 370, 378 

Nauglamir 'The Necklace of the Dwarves', made for 
Finrod Felagund by the Dwarves, brought by Hurin out of 
Nargothrond to Thingol, and the cause of his death. 134, 
285-7, 291 

Naugrim 'The Stunted People', Sindarin name for the 
Dwarves. 103-5, 107-9, 132, 159, 161,231,236,289 
Nazgul See Ring-waiths. 

Necklace of the Dwarves See Nauglamir. 

Neithan Name given to himself by Turin among the 
outlaws, translated as 'The Wronged' (literally 'one who is 
deprived'). 245 

Neldoreth The great beech-forest forming the northern 
part of Doriath; called Taur-na-Neldor \r\ Treebeard's song 



in The Twd Tovars HI 4. 57, 103, 105, 109, 145, 199, 208, 
242, 289 

A/enarName of a star. 48 

Nen Girith 'Shuddering Water 1 , name given to Dimrost, 
the falls of Celebros in the Forest of Brethil. 270-4, 276 
Nenning River in West Beleriand, reaching the sea at 
the Haven of Eglarest. 142, 239, 259 

Nenuial 'Lake of Twilight', in Eriador, where the river 
Baranduin rose, and beside which the city of Annuminas 
was built. 361 

Nenya One of the Three Rings of the Elves, the Ring of 
Water, borne by Galadriel; also called the Ring of 
Adamant, 357, 370 

Nerdanel Called the Wise; daughter of Mahtan the 
smith, wife of Feanor. 69, 71 , 75 

Nessa One of the Valier, the sister of Orome and 
spouse of Tulkas. 18, 22, 31 

Nevrast The region west of Dor-lomin, beyond Ered 
Lomin, where Turgon dwelt before his departure to 
Gondolin. The name, meaning 'Hither Shore', was originally 
that of all the northwestern coast of Middle-earth (the 
opposite being Haerast 'the Far Shore', the coast of 
Aman). 133-5, 141, 149-50, 156,239,240,295,302 

Nienna One of the Valier, numbered among the 
Aratar; Lady of pity and mourning, the sister of Mandos and 
Lorien; see especially 21-2. 18, 21-2, 25, 33, 70, 87, 113 
Nienor 'Mourning', the daughter of Hurin and Morwen 
and sister of Turin; spell-bound by Glaurung at Nargothrond 
and in ignorance of her past wedded Turin in Brethil in her 
name Niniel; cast herself into the Teiglin. 243, 260, 263-4, 
267-79 

Nimbrethil Birch-woods in Arvernien in the south of 
Beleriand. Cf. Bilbo's song at Rivendell: 'He built a boat of 
timber felled in Nimbrethil to journey in ...' ( The Fellomhip 
of the Ring I1 1 ). 304 

Nimloth (1) The White Tree of Numenor, of which a 
fruit taken by Isildur before it was felled grew into the White 
Tree of Minas Ithil. Nimloth 'White Blossom' is the Sindarin 
form of Quenya Ninqueiote, one of the names of Telperion. 
62, 324, 331-2, 336-8, 342, 361-2 

Nimloth (2) Elf of Doriath who wedded Dior Thingol's 



Heir; mother of Elwing; slain in Menegroth in the attack by 
the sons of Feanor. 290-1 

Nimphelos The great pearl given by Thingol to the lord 
of the Dwarves of Belegost. 1 05 

Niniel 'Tear-maiden', the name that Turin, ignorant of 
their relationship, gave to his sister; see Nienor. 

Ninquelote 'White Blossom', a name of Telperion; see 
Nimloth (1). 33 

niphredil A white flower that bloomed in Doriath in 
starlight when Luthien was bom. It grew also on Cerin 
Amroth in Lothlorien ( The Fellozship of the Ring II 6, 8). 
103 

Nimaeth Amoediad 'Tears Unnumbered' (also simply 
the Nimaeth), the name given to the ruinous fifth battle in 
the Wars of Beleriand. 166, 234-8, 242, 254, 257, 294, 
297-8 

Nivrim That part of Doriath that lay on the west bank of 
Sirion. 145 

Noegyth Nibin 'Petty-dwarves' (see also under 
Dmrves). 250, 284 

Nogrod One of the two cities of the Dwarves in the 
Blue Mountains; translation into Sindarin of Dwarvish 
Tumunzahar. See Hollovibold. 104, 107, 132, 158, 161, 
215,231,250,285-8,291 

Noldolante 'The Fall of the Noldor 1 , a lament made by 
Maglor son of Feanor. 98 

Noldor The Deep Elves, the second host of the Eldar 
on the westward journey from Cuivienen, led by Finwe. The 
name (Quenya Noldo, Sindarin Golodh) meant 'the Wise' 
(but wise in the sense of possessing knowledge, not in the 
sense of possessing sagacity, sound judgement). For the 
language of the Noldor see Quenya, Passim; see 
especially 35, 54, 63-8, 137, 356 

Nom, Nomin 'Wisdom' and 'the Wise', the names that 
the Men of Boor's following gave to Finrod and his people 
in their own tongue. 168 

North Dowis In Eriador, where was built the 
Numenorean city of Fomost 360 

Nulukkizdin Dwarvish name of Nargothrond. 284 

Numenor (In full Quenya form Numenore, 321-2, 347.) 



'Westemesse', 'Westland', the great island prepared by the 
Valar as a dwelling-place for the Edain after the ending of 
the First Age. Called also Anadune, Andor, Elenna, the 
Land of the Star, and after its downfall Akallabeth, 
Atalante, and Mar-nu-Falmar. 62, 177, 321-37, 341-7, 
354, 358-63, 368, 375 

Numenoreans The Men of Numenor, called also 
Dunedain. 24, 321-35, 337-9, 342-7, 355, 359-65,367- 
70,372,376-7 

Nurtale Valinoreva 'The Hiding of Valinor 1 . 118 
Ohtar 'Warrior 1 , esquire of Isildur, who brought the 
shards of Elendil's sword to Imladris. 367 

Oiolosse 'Ever-snow-white', the most common name 
among the Eldar for Taniquetil, rendered into Sindarin as 
Amon Uilos; but according to the Valaquenta it was the 
uttermost tower of Taniquetil.. 19, 32 

Oiomure A region of mists near to the Helcaraxe. 88 
OlorinA Maia, one of the Istari (Wizards); see 
Mithrandir, Gandalf, and cf. The Two Tov&amp;rs IV 5: 'Olorin I 
was in my youth in the West that is forgotten'. 25-6 

olvar An Elvish word retained in the speeches of 
Yavanna and Manwe in Chapter II, meaning 'growing things 
with roots in the earth', 43-4 

QA/ie Leader together with his brother Elwe (Thingol) of 
the hosts of the Teleri on the westward journey from 
Cuivienen; lord of the Teleri of Alqualonde in Aman. 54-8, 
60-1 , 63-5, 97-1 00, 1 07, 1 30, 1 52 

Ondolinde 'Stone Song', the original Quenya name of 
Gondolin. 149 

Ores Creatures of Morgoth. Passim; for their origin 
see 50, 106 

Orfalch Echor The great ravine through the Encircling 
Mountains by which Gondolin was approached. 296 

Ormal One of the Lamps of the Valar made by Aule, 
Ormal stood in the south of Middle-earth. 29-30 

Orocami The Mountains of the East of Middle-earth 
(the name means "the Red Mountains'). 49 

Orodreth The second son of Finarfin; warden of the 
tower of Minas Tirith on Tol Sirion; King of Nargothrond 
after the death of Finrod his brother; father of Finduilas; 
slain in the Battle of Tumhalad. 64, 93, 142, 187-8, 206, 


209,213,230,257-61,266 

Orodruin 'Mountain of Blazing Fire' in Mordor, in which 
Sauron forged the Ruling Ring; called also Amon Amarth 
'Mount Doom'. 357, 363-6 

Orome A Vala, one of the Aratar; the great hunter, 
leader of the Elves from Cuivienen, spouse of Vana. The 
name means 'Horn-blowing' or 'Sound of Horns', cf. 
Valaroma; in The Lord of the Rings it appears in the 
Sindarin form Araw. See especially 22-3. 18, 22-3, 31. 37, 
47, 49-51, 53-5, 59, 63, 65, 79-82, 85, 93, 106, 108, 114, 
184,209,225 

Oromet A hill pear the haven of Andunie in the west of 
Numenor, on which was built the tower of Tar-Minastir. 332 

Orthanc 'Forked Height', the Numenorean tower in the 
Circle of Isengard. 361-2, 372 

Osgiliath 'Fortress of the Stars', the chief city of 
ancient Gondor, on either side of the river Anduin. 361-4, 
368 

Osse A Maia, vassal of Ulmo, with whom he entered 
the waters of Arda; lover and instructor of the Teleri. 24, 36, 
60-1,64,98, 141,240,321 

Ossiriand 'Land of Seven Rivers' (these being Gelion 
and its tributaries flowing down from the Blue Mountains), 
the land of the Green-elves. Cf. Treebeard's song in The 
Two Tov\ers III 4: 'I wandered in Summer in the elm-woods 
of Ossiriand. Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by 
the Seven Rivers of Ossir!' See Lindon. 108, 110, 133, 
144-8, 167, 170-1, 182, 184,229,239,289-91,354 

Ost-in-Edhil 'Fortress of the Eldar 1 , the city of the Elves 
in Eregion. 354-6 

Outer Lands Middle-earth (also called the Hither 
Lands). 35, 36, 47, 88, 102, 115, 308 

Outer Sea See Ekkaia. 

Palantiri 'Those that watch from afar 1 , the seven 
Seeing Stones brought by Elendil and his sons from 
Numenor; made by Feanor in Aman (see 69, and The Two 
Towers III 11). 342,362 

Pelargir 'Garth of Royal Ships,' the Numenorean haven 
above the delta of Anduin. 329 

Pelori 'The fencing or defensive heights', called also 
the Mountains of Aman and the Mountains of Defence, 



raised by the Valar after the destruction of their dwelling on 
Almaren; ranging in a crescent from north to south, close to 
the eastern shores of Aman. 32, 34, 46, 59, 62, 80-1, 88, 
115-7,210 

People ofHaleth See Haladin and Haleth. 

Periannath The Halflings (Hobbits). 316 
Petty-dvarves Translation of Noegyth Nibin. See also 
under Dmrves. 

Pharazon See Ar-Pharazdn. 

Prophecy of the North The Doom of the Noldor, 
uttered by Mandos on the coast of Araman. 98 

Quendi Original Elvish name for Elves (of every kind, 
including the Avari), meaning Those that speak with 
voices'. 37-8, 48-53, 57, 61, 73, 76, 1 14, 121-2, 169 

Quenta Silmarillion The History of the Silmarils.' 355 
Quenya The ancient tongue, common to all Elves, in 
the form that it took in Valinor; brought to Middle-earth by 
the Noldorin exiles, but abandoned by them as a daily 
speech, especially after the edict of King Thingol against its 
use; see especially 133, 155. Not named as such in this 
book, but referred to as Eldarin, 21, 323, 347; High 
Eldarin, 322-3; High-elven, 266, 330; the tongue of 
Valinor, 133; the speech of the Elves of Valinor, 149; the 
tongue of the Noldor, 155, 159; the High Speech of the 
West, 1 55 

Radagast One of the Istari (Wizards). 372, 375 
Radhruin One of the twelve companions of Barahir on 
Dorthonion. 187 

Ragnor One of the twelve companions of Barahir on 
Dorthonion. 187 

Ramdal 'Wall's End' (see Andram), where the dividing 
fall across Beleriand ceased' 146,184 

Rana 'The Wanderer', a name of the Moon among the 
Noldor. 114 

Rathloriel 'Golden-bed', later name for the river Ascar, 
after the treasure of Doriath was sunk in it 147, 291 

Rauros 'Roaring Spray 1 , the great falls in the river 
Anduin. 369 

Red Ring, The See Narya. 

Region The dense forest forming the southern part of 



Doriath. 57, 105, 110, 145, 158,288-9 

Rerir Mountain to the north of Lake Helevorn, where 
rose the greater of the two tributary branches of Gelion. 
132,146-8,184 

Rhovanion 'Wilderland', the wide region east of the 
Misty Mountains. 360-1 

Rhudaur Region in the north-east of Eriador. 360 
Rian Daughter of Belegund (nephew of Barahir, the 
father of Beren); wife of Huor and mother of Tuor; after 
Huor's death died of grief on the Haudh-en-Ndengin. 177, 
187,194,242,294 

Ring'll The sword of Fingolfin. 185 
Ring of Doom See Mahanaxar. 

Rings of Power 356-7, 373-5; The One Ring, Great 
Ring, or Ruling Ring: 330, 347, 356-8, 363, 365-6, 370-1 , 
374-7; Three Rings of the Elves: 357, 370-1, 378 (see 
also Narya, the Ring of Fire, Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, 
and Vilya, the Ring of Sapphire). Seven Rings of the 
Dwarves 357-8, 371 , 375. Nine Rings of Men 330, 357-8, 
371,375 

Ringwl The stream that flowed into the river Narog at 
Nargothrond. 146 

Ring-waiths The slaves of the Nine Rings of Men and 
chief servants of Sauron; also called Nazgul and Ulairi. 
330,361,368,372,376 

Rivendell Translation of Imladris. 

Rivil Stream falling northwards from Dorthonion and 
flowing into Sirion in the Fen of Serech. 233, 237. Rivil's 
Well 1 97 

Rochallor The horse of Fingolfin. 184 
Rohan The Horse-country 1 , later name in Condor for 
the great grassy plain formerly called Calenardhon. 369, 
377 

Rohirrim 'The Horse-lords' of Rohan. 369 
Romenna 'Haven on the east coast of Numenor. 331 , 
336-7,341,346 

Rothinzil Adunaic (Numenorean) name of Earendil's 
ship Vingilot, with the same meaning, 'Foam-flower 1 . 319- 
21 

Rumil A Noldorin sage of Tirion, the first deviser of 



written characters (cf. The Lord of the Rings Appendix E II); 
to him is attributed the Ainulindale. 67-8 

Saeros Nandorin Elf, one of the chief counsellors of 
Thingol in Doriath; insulted Turin in Menegroth, and by him 
pursued to his death. 244 

Salmar A Maia who entered Arda with Ulmo; maker of 
Ulmo's great horns, the Ulumuri. 36 

Sam Athrad 'Ford of Stones', where the Dwarf-road 
from Nogrod and Belegost crossed the river Gelion. 104, 
167,287,291 

Saruman 'Man of Skill', the name among Men of 
Ctvrtv/7/r (which it translates), one of the Istari (Wizards). 
37213 

Sauron 'The Abhorred' (in Sindarin called Gorthaur); 
greatest of the servants of Melkor, in his origin a Maia of 
Aule. 26, 47, 52, 169, 187-8, 195-8, 206-8, 210-3, 216, 
330, 333-40, 343, 346-8, 353-77 

Secondbom, The The Younger Children of lluvatar, 
Men. 44 

Seeing Stones See Palantiri. 

Serech The great fen north of the Pass of Sirion, 
where the river Rivil flowed in from Dorthonion. 124, 182, 
197,233,236,282 

seregon 'Blood of Stone', a plant with deep red flowers 
that grew on Amon Rudh. 248, 252 

Serinde 'The Broideress'; see Mine! (I). 

Seven Fathers of the Dwarves See Dwarves. 

Seven Stones See Palantiri. 

Shadowy Mountains See Ered Wethrin. 

Shepherds of the Trees Ents. 45, 290 
Sickle of the Valor See Valacirca. 

Silmarien Daughter of Tar-Elendil, the fourth King of 
Numenor; mother of the first lord of Andunie and ancestress 
of Elendil and his sons Isildur and Anarion. 331 

Silmarils The three jewels made by Feanor before the 
destruction of the Two Trees of Valinor, and filled with their 
light; see especially 72-3. 35, 72-5, 78, 83, 86-93, 116. 
121-2, 126, 130, 136, 152, 202-5, 209, 219-21, 224-6, 
230, 243, 286-93, 302-3, 305-6, 310, 313-4 
Silpion A name of Telperion. 33 
Silvan Elves Also called Woodland Elves. They 



appear to have been in origin those Nandorin Elves who 
never passed west of the Misty Mountains, but remained in 
the Vale of Anduin and in Greenwood the Great; see 
Nandor 354, 370 

Sindar The Grey-elves. The name was applied to all 
the Elves of Telerin origin whom the returning Noldor found 
in Beleriand, save for the Green-elves of Ossiriand. The 
Noldor may have devised this name because the first Elves 
of this origin whom they met with were in the north, under 
the grey skies and mists about Lake Mithrim (see Mithrim); 
or perhaps because the Grey-elves were not of the Light (of 
Valinor) nor yet of the Dark (Avari), but were Elves of the 
Tvulight (58). But it was held to refer to Elwe's name 
Thingol (Quenya Sindacollo, Singollo 'Grey-cloak'), since 
he was acknowledged high king of all the land and its 
peoples. The Sindar called themselves Edhil, plural Edhel. 
22, 32, 58, 103, 108, 120, 125, 133, 137-42, 148, 150, 
153-5, 164, 171, 182,188-90, 242, 277, 289, 291, 294, 
353 

Sindarin The Elvish tongue of Beleriand, derived from 
the common Elvish speech but greatly changed through 
long ages from Quenya of Valinor; acquired by the Noldorin 
exiles in Beleriand (see 133, 155). Called also the Grey- 
elven tongue, the tongue of the Elves of Beleriand, etc. 
36, 62-3, 133, 140, 149, 155, 177, 187, 199, 250, 319, 322 

Singollo 'Grey-cloak', 'Grey-mantle'; see Sindar, 
Thingol, 

Si rion 'The Great River 1 flowing from north to south and 
dividing West from East Beleriand. Passim; see especially 
52, 141-2, 145. Falls of Si rion 203, 285. Fens of Si rion 
203. Gates of Sirion 146. Havens of Sirion 294, 304-5, 
313. Mouths of Sirion 60, 142, 190, 192, 239, 293, 302, 
304. Pass of Sirion 135, 141, 182, 193, 215, 234, 237, 
260, 265. Vale of Sirion 56, 124, 135, 140, 149, 248, 265, 
301 

Sons of Feanor See Maedhros, Magi or, Celegorm, 
Caranthir, Curufm, Amrod, Amras, Often referred to as a 
group, especially after the death of their father: 69, 74-5, 
77,93, 126-7, 131-3, 144, 147-8, 152-4, 157, 159-61, 180, 
183-4, 204, 213-4, 223, 230-1, 235, 238-9, 292-3, 



302,305,313-4 

Soronume Name of a constellation. 48 
Stone of the Hapless Memorial stone of Turin and 
Nienor by Cabed Naeramarth in the river Teiglin. 283-4 
Straight Road, Straight Way The path over the Sea 
into the Ancient or True West, on which the ships of the 
Elves might still sail after the Downfall of Numenor and the 
Changing of the World. 348-9 

SfrongbowTranslation of Cuthalion, name of Beleg. 
Sul i mo Name of Manwe, rendered in the Valaquenta 
as 'Lord of the Breath of Arda' (literally 'the Breather 1 ). 18, 
35, 95 

Swanhaven See Alqualonde. 

Swarthy Men See Easterlings. 1 89 
Talath Dimen The Guarded Plain, north of 
Nargothrond. 176, 203, 208, 252, 258, 261 

Talath Rhunen 'The East Vale', earlier name of 
Thargelion. 148 

Taniquetil 'High White Peak', highest of the mountains 
of the Pelori and the highest mountain of Arda, upon whose 
summit are llmarin, the mansions of Manwe and Varda; 
also called the White Mountain, the Holy Mountain, and 
the Mountain of Manwe. See Oiolosse, 19, 32, 35, 47, 51, 
65, 81-4, 88, 93, 96, 129, 307, 344, 348 

Tar-Ancalimon Fourteenth King of Numenor, in whose 
time the Numenoreans became divided into opposed 
parties. 328 

Taras Mountain on a promontory of Nevrast; beneath it 
was Vinyamar, the dwelling of Turgon before he went to 
Gondolin. 140, 295 

Tar-Atanamir Thirteenth King of Numenor, to whom 
the Messengers of the Valar came. 327-8 

Tar-Calion Quenya name of Ar-Pharazon. 333, 359 
Tar-Ciryatan Twelfth King of Numenor 'the 
Shipbuilder'. 327 

Tar-Elendil Fourth King of Numenor, father of 
Silmarien, from whom Elendil was descended. 331 

Tar-Minastir Eleventh King of Numenor, who aided 
Gil-galad against Sauron. 329-30, 332 

Tar-Minyatur Name of Elros Half-elven as first King of 
Numenor. 336 



Tar-Miriel See Miriel (2). 

Tam Aeluin The lake on Dorthonion where Barahir 
and his companions made their lair, and where they were 
slain. 195-6 

Tar-Pal antir Twenty-third King of Numenor, who 
repented of the ways of the Kings, and took his name in 
Quenya: 'He who looks afar'. See Inziladun. 332, 337 

Taur-en-Faroth The wooded highlands to the west of 
the river Narog above Nargothrond; also called the High 
Faroth. 134,145,203 

Taur-im-Duinath The Forest between Rivers', name 
of the wild country south of the Andram between Sirion and 
Gelion. 147, 184 

Taur-nu-Fuin Later name of Dorthonion: 'the Forest 
under Night'. Cf. Delduwath. 186, 206, 212, 215-6, 221, 
223, 245, 253-6 

Tauron 'The Forester' (translated in the Valaquenta 
'Lord of Forests'), a name of Orome among the Sindar. Cf. 
Aldaron. 22 

Teiglin A tributary of Sirion, rising in Ered Wethrin and 
bounding the Forest of Brethil on the south; see also 
Crossings of Teiglin. 142, 145, 176, 190, 245, 251, 261, 
265,271,273,279,284 

Telchar The most renowned of the smiths of Nogrod, 
the maker of Angrist and (according to Aragorn in The Two 
Towers III 6) of Narsil. 107,215 

Telemnar Twenty-sixth King of Gondor. 368 

Teleri The third and greatest of the three hosts of the 
Eldar on the westward journey from Cuivienen, led by Elwe 
(Thingol) and Olwe. Their own name for themselves was 
Lindar the Singers; the name Teleri the Last-comers, the 
Hindmost, was given to them by those before them on the 
march. Many of the Teleri did not leave Middle-earth; the 
Sindar and the Nandor were Telerin Elves in origin. 36, 54- 
7, 60-4, 71, 79-80, 83, 96-8, 101, 107, 111,117, 159160, 
164,306-9,310,315,354 

Telperion The elder of the Two Trees of Valinor. 34, 
47, 62, 82, 114-5, 247, 324, 361-2. Called the White Tree 
62 

Telumendil Name of a constellation. 48 



Thalion 'Steadfast, Strong'; see Hurin. 

Thalos The second of the tributaries of Gelion in 
Ossiriand. 147, 167 

Thangorodrim 'Mountains of Tyranny 1 , reared by 
Morgoth above Angband; broken down in the Great Battle 
at the end of the First Age. 90, 109, 125-8, 136,139-40, 
180-3, 215, 221, 232, 234, 240, 254, 312, 320, 353-4, 364 

Thargelion 'The Land beyond Gelion', between Mount 
Rerir and the river Ascar, where Caranthir dwelt; called also 
Dor Caranthir and Talath Rhunen. 148, 158, 171, 174, 
184 

Thingol 'Grey-cloak', 'Grey-mantle' (in Quenya 
Sindacollo, Singollo), the name by which Elwe, leader with 
his brother Olwe of the host of the Teleri from Cuivienen 
and afterwards King of Doriath, was known in Beleriand; 
also called the Hidden King. See E/vie. 58, 103-10, 125, 
130-1, 134, 145, 151-5, 157, 172, 176-7, 182, 190, 199- 
204, 208-9, 217, 222-7, 229-30, 243-7, 260, 267,269,280, 
285-92,297,315 

Thorondor 'King of Eagles'. Cf. The Return of the 
KingV I 4: 'Old Thorondor, who built his eyries in the 
inaccessible peaks of the Encircling Mountains when 
Middle-earth was young'. See Crissaegrim. 129, 149, 186, 
191,221,281,297,301,312 

Thousand Caves See Menegroth. 

Thranduil Sindarin Elf, King of the Silvan Elves in the 
north of Greenwood the Great (Mirkwood); father of 
Legolas, who was of the Fellowship of the Ring. 371 

Thurlng\/\ethil 'Woman of Secret Shadow', the 
messenger of Sauron from Tol-in-Gaurhoth who took the 
form of a great bat, and in whose shape Luthien entered 
Angband. 216 

Til ion A Mai a, steersman of the Moon. 1 14-7 

Tintalle 'The Kindler', a name of Varda as maker of 
the Stars. She is called thus in Galadriel's lament in Lorien, 
The Fellomhip of the Ring II 8 . Cf. Elbereth, Elentari. 48 

Tinuviel The name that Beren gave to Luthien: a 
poetic word for the nightingale, 'Daughter of Twilight'. See 
Luthien. 

Tirion 'Great Watch-tower 1 , the city of the Elves on the 
hill of Tuna in Aman. 62, 65-7, 74-5, 77-8, 83, 91, 94-6, 



117,1 34-5, 1 49-52, 205, 297, 307, 361 

Tol Eressea The Lonely Isle' (also simply Eressea), 
on which the Vanyar and the Noldor and afterwards the 
Teleri were drawn across the ocean by Ulmo, and which 
was at last rooted in the Bay of Eldamar near to the coasts 
of Aman. On Eressea the Teleri long remained before they 
went to Alqualonde; and there dwelt many of the Noldor and 
the Sindar after the ending of the First Age. 50, 60-2, 64, 
1 18, 306, 31 0, 31 5, 321 , 324, 331 , 345, 349, 355, 362 
Tol Galen The Green Isle' in the river Adurant in 
Ossiriand, where Beren and Luthien dwelt after their return. 
147,229,290 

Tol-in-Gaurhoth 'Isle of Werewolves', name of Tol 
Sirion after its capture bySauron. 188, 208, 210 

Tol Mon/en Island in the sea after the drowning of 
Beleriand on which stood the memorial stone of Turin, 
Nienor, and Morwen. 284 

Tol Sirion Island in the river in the Pass of Sirion on 
which Finrod built the tower of Minas Tirith; after its capture 
bySauron named Tol-in-Gaurhoth. 133, 142, 188 

Tulkas A Vala, the 'greatest in strength and deeds of 
prowess', who came last to Arda; also called Astaldo. 18, 
22, 29-31 , 47, 51 , 52, 70-1 , 77-80, 85-7 

Tumhalad Valley in the land between the rivers 
Ginglith and Narog, where the host of Nargothrond was 
defeated. 261 

Tumladen The Wide Valley 1 , the hidden vale in the 
Encircling Mountains in the midst of which stood the city of 
Gondolin. ( Tumladen was afterwards the name of a valley 
in Gondor: The Return of the King V 1). 135, 149, 160, 
191,221,296, 301 

TumunzaharSee Nogrod. 104 
Tuna The green hill in the Calacirya on which Tlrion, 
the city of the Elves, was built. 62, 65-7, 75, 79, 91, 96, 
100,1 17, 135, 149, 307, 324, 344 

Tuor Son of Huor and Rian, fostered by the Grey-elves 
of Mithrim; entered Gondolin bearing the message of Ulmo; 
wedded Idril Turgon's daughter, and with her and their son 
Earendil escaped from the destruction of the City; in his 
ship Earrame set sail into the West. 177, 242, 294-304, 
308 



Turambar 'Master of Doom', the last name taken by 
Turin, during his days in the Forest of Brethil. 266, 270-80, 
284 

Turgon Called the Wise; the second son of Fingolfin; 
dwelt at Vinyamar in Nevrast before he departed in secret 
to Gondolin, which he ruled until his death in the sack of the 
city; father of Idril the mother of Earendil 64, 93, 1 00-2, 1 33, 
135, 140-1, 149-51,155-7, 160, 163-5, 186, 191-3, 221, 
231-2, 234-7, 240, 247, 281-2, 294-300, 302, 308, 315 
Tur Haretha The burial-mound of the Lady Haleth in 
the Forest of Brethil (see Haudh-en-An/\en). 1 76 

Turin Son of Hurin and Morwen; chief subject of the lay 
named Nam i Hin Hurin from which Chapter XXI was 
derived. For his other names see Neithan, Gorthol, 
Agarmen, Mormegil, Wildman of the Woods, Turambar. 
1 77, 1 78, 205, 242-66, 271 , 274-80, 284 
Tvu light Meres See Aelin-uial. 

Two Kindreds Elves and Men. 307-8, 319, 366 
Two Trees of Valinor 33-4, 45-6, 53-4, 58, 61-2, 65, 
71-2, 78, 83-4, 86, 109, 111-6, 119, 151, 288, 296, 302, 
336-7 

Uinen A Maia, the Lady of the Seas, spouse of Osse. 
24, 36, 60, 98 

Ulairi See Ring-waiths. 

Uldor Called the Accursed; son of Ulfang the Black; 
slain by Maglor in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 189, 232, 235-7, 
311 

Ulfang Called the Black; a chieftain of the Easterlings, 
who with his three sons followed Caranthir, and proved 
faithless in the Nimaeth Arnoediad. 189, 231, 235 

Ulfast Son of Ulfang the Black, slain by the sons of Bor 
in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 189, 235 

Ulmo A Vala, one of the Aratar, called Lord of Waters 
and King of the Sea, The name was interpreted by the 
Eldar to mean 'The Pourer' or 'The Rainer*. See especially 
19-20, 36. 8-10, 18-24, 36, 44, 51, 52, 59-61, 64, 70, 97, 
116, 120, 133-5, 141, 146, 149-52, 187, 190, 240, 256, 
260, 294-8, 301-2, 305-6, 308 

Ulumuri The great horns of Ulmo made by the Maia 
Salmar. 19, 36, 59 

Ulwarth Son of Ulfang the Black, slain by the sons of 



Bor in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 1 89, 235 

Umanyar Name given to those Elves who went on the 
westward Journey from Cuivienen but did not reach Aman: 
Those not of Aman', beside Amanyar Those of Aman'. 54, 
58 

Umarth 'Ill-fate', a fictitious name for his father given 
out by Turin in Nargothrond. 257 

Umbar Great natural haven and fortress of the 
Numenoreans south of the Bay of Belfalas. 334 

Undying Lands Aman and Eressea; also called the 
Deathless Lands. 308, 320, 324, 345, 348 

Ungoliant The great spider, destroyer with Melkor of 
the Trees of Valinor. Shelob in The Lord of the Rings was 
'the last child of Ungoliant to trouble the unhappy world' 
(The Two Tovars IV 9). 79-80, 84, 85, 88-90, 100, 109, 
116, 144, 157,198,307 

Union of Maedhros The league formed by Maedhros 
to defeat Morgoth that ended in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad 
230 

Urthel One of the twelve companions of Barahir on 
Dorthonion. 187 

Uruloki Quenya word meaning 'fire-serpent', dragon. 
137,294-304,308 

Utumno The first great stronghold of Melkor, in the 
north of Middle-earth, destroyed by the Valar. 31, 37, 46, 
51-2,81,91, 114, 139 

Vaire 'The Weaver', one of the Valier, the spouse of 
Namo Mandos. 18, 21 

Valacirca 'The Sickle of the Valar', name of the 
constellation of the Great Bear. 48, 21 1 

Valandil Youngest son of Isildur; third King of Amor. 
367 

Valaquenta 'Account of the Valar', a short work treated 
as a separate entity from The Silmarillion proper. 

Valar 'Those with Power 1 , 'The Powers' (singular 
Vala); name given to those great Ainur who entered into Ea 
at the beginning of Time, and assumed the function of 
guarding and governing Arda. Called also the Great Ones, 
the Rulers of Arda, the Lords of the West, the Lords of 
Valinor. Passim; see especially 10-12, 37, 81-2, and see 



also Ainur, Aratar. 

Valaraukar 'Demons of Might' (singular Valarauko), 
Quenya form corresponding to Sindarin Balrog. 26 

Valaroma The horn of the Vala Orome. 22, 37, 85, 
108-9 

Valier 'The Queens of the Valar 1 (singular Valie); a 
term used only in the Valaquenta. 1 8, 20, 23 
Valimar See Valmar. 

Valinor The land of the Valar in Aman, beyond the 
mountains of the Pelori; also called the Guarded Realm. 
Passim; see especially 32-3, 1 1 7 

Valmar The city of the Valar in Valinor; the name also 
occurs in the form Valimar. In Galadriel's lament in Lorien 
(The Fellomhip of the Ring II 8) Valimar is made 
equivalent to Valinor. 21-3, 33, 51, 57, 64, 70, 76-9, 82-4, 
94, 117,227-8,307-8 

Vana One of the Valier, the sister of Yavanna and 
spouse of Orome; called the Ever-young. 1 8 , 23, 1 14 

Vanyar The first host of the Eldar on the westward 
journey from Cuivienen, led by Ingwe. The name (singular 
Vanya) means 'the Fair', referring to the golden hair of the 
Vanyar; see Finarfin. 35, 55, 59, 62-5, 69, 71, 83-4, 91, 
112-4, 117, 155, 163,310,315 

Varda 'The Exalted', 'The Lofty 1 ; also called the Lady of 
the Stars. Greatest of the Valier, the spouse of Manwe, 
dwelling with him on Taniquetil. Other names of Varda, as 
maker of the Stars, were Elbereth, Elentah, Tintalle. See 
especially 18-9, 18-9, 23-4, 29, 32, 34-6, 47-8, 54, 62, 73, 
83-4,86,93, 113-6,211,313-6 

Vasa 'The Consumer', a name of the Sun among the 
Noldor. 114 

Vilya One of the Three Rings of the Elves, the Ring of 
Air, borne by Gil-galad and afterwards by Elrond; also 
called The Ring of Sapphire. 357, 370 

Vingilot (In full Quenya form Vingilote). 'Foam-flower', 
the name of Earendil's ship; see Rothinzil. 305, 310, 312, 
319 

VinyamarThe house of Turgon in Nevrast under Mount 
Taras. The meaning is probably 'New Dwelling'. 135, 141, 
150, 155,295-7 



Voronv\e The Steadfast', Elf of Gondolin, the only 
mariner to survive from the seven ships sent into the West 
after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad; met with Tuor at Vinyamar 
and guided him to Gondolin. 240, 295 

Westemesse See Anadune, Numenor. 

White Council The Council of the Wise in the Third 
Age formed to oppose Sauron. 373-5 
White Mountain See Taniquetil. 

White Tree See Telperion, Galathilion, Nimloth (1). 
The White Trees of Minas Ithil and Minas Anor: 337, 342, 
361 , 364-8, 378 

Wildman of the Woods Name adopted by Turin when 
he first came among the Men of Brethil. 265 

Wilmrin Name of a constellation. The word meant 
'butterfly 1 in Quenya, and the constellation was perhaps 
Cassiopeia. 48 

Wizards See Istari. 372 
Woodland Elves See Silvan Elves. 

Yavanna 'Giver of fruits'; one of the Valier, numbered 
among the Aratar; the spouse of Aule; called also 
Kementari See especially 20-1 . 18, 20-3, 29-30, 33-5, 43- 
7, 57, 62, 82, 86-8, 90, 1 03, 1 1 3-4, 1 20, 321 , 324, 362 
Year of Lamentation The year of the Nirnaeth 
Arnoediad. 151, 243 



APPENDIX 


Elements in Quenya and Sindarin Names 

These notes have been compiled for those who take 
an interest in the Eldarin languages, and The Lord of the 
Rings is extensively drawn upon for illustration. They are 
necessarily very compressed, giving an air of certainty and 
finality that is not altogether justified; and they are very 
selective, this depending both on considerations of length 
and the limitations of the editor's knowledge. The headings 
are not arranged systematically by roots or in Quenya or 
Sindarin forms, but somewhat arbitrarily, the aim being to 
make the component elements of names as readily 
identifiable as possible. 

adan (plural Edain) in Adanedhel, Aradan, Dunedain. 
For its meaning and history see Atani in the Index. 
aelin 'lake, pool' in Aelin-uial; cf. lin (2). 
aglar 'glory, brilliance' in Dagor Aglareb, Aglarond. 
The form in Quenya, alkar, has transposition of the 
consonants: to Sindarin aglareb corresponds Alkarinque. 
The root is kal- 'shine', q.v. 

aina 'holy 1 in Ainur, Ainu! indale, 
alda 'tree' (Quenya) in Aldaron, Aldudenie, Malinalda, 
corresponding to Sindarin galadh (seen in Caras Galadon 
and the Galadrim of Lothlorien). 

alqua 'swan' (Sindarin alph) \r\Alqualonde; from a 
root alak- 'rushing' occurring also in Ancalagon. 

amarth 'doom' in Amon Amarth, Cabed Naeramarth, 
Umarth, and in the Sindarin form of Turin's name 'Master of 
Doom', Turamarth. The Quenya form of the word appears 
in Turambar. 

amon 'hill', a Sindarin word occurring as the first 
element of many names; plural emyn in Emyn Beraid. 445 
anca 'jaws' in Ancalagon (for the second element in 
this name see alqua). 

an(d) 'long' in Andram, Anduin; also in Anfalas ('Lang- 
strand') in Gondor, Cair Andros ('ship of long-foam') an 
island in Anduin, and Angerthas 'long rune-rows'. 



andune 'sunset, west' in Andunie, to which 
corresponds in Sindari nannun, cf. Annuminas, and 
Henneth Annun 'window of the sunset' in Ithilien. The 
ancient root of these words, ndu, meaning 'down, from on 
high', appears also in Quenya numen 'the way of the 
sunset, west' and in Sindarin dun 'west', cf . Dunedain, 
Adunaic adun i n Adunakhor, Anadune was a loan from 
Eldarin speech. 

anga 'iron', Sindarin ang, in Angainor, Angband, 
Anghabar, Anglachel, Angrist, Angrod, Anguirel, 
Gurthang; angren 'of iron' in Angrenost, plural engrin in 
Ered Engrin. 

anna 'gift' in Annatar, Melian, Yavanna; the same 
stem in Andor' Land of Gift'. 

annon 'great door or gate', plural ennyn, in Annon-in- 
Gelydh; cf. Morannon the 'Black Gate' of Mordor and 
Sirannon the 'Gate-stream' of Moria. 

ar- 'beside, outside' (whence Quenya ar 'and', Sindarin 
a), probably in Araman 'outside Aman'; cf. also ( Nimaeth ) 
Amoedi ad '(Tears) without reckoning'. 

ar(a)- 'high, noble, royal' appears in a great many 
names, as Aradan, Aredhel, Argonath, Amor, etc.; 
extended stem arat- appearing in Aratar, and in arato 
'champion, eminent man', e.g. Angrod from Angarato and 
FinrodUom Find arato; also aran 'king' mAranruth. 
Ereinion 'scion of kings' (name of Gil-galad) has the plural 
of aran; cf. Fomost Erain 'Norbury of the Kings' in Arnor. 
The prefix Ar- of the Adunaic names of the Kings of 
Numenor was derived from this. 

arien (the Maia of the Sun) is derived from a root as- 
seen also in Quenya are 'sunlight'. 

atar 'father' in Atanatari (see Atani in Index), lluvatar. 
band 'prison, duress' in Angband; from original 
mbando, of which the Quenya form appears in Mandos 
(Sindarin Angband=Q\jenya Angamando). 

bar 'dwelling' in Bar-en-Danv\edh. The ancient word 
mbar (Quenya mar, Sindarin bar) meant the 'home' both of 
persons and of peoples, and thus appears in many place- 
names, as Brithombar, Dimbar (the first element of which 
means 'sad, gloomy'), Eldamar, Val(i)mar, Vinyamar, Mar- 



nu-Falmar. Mardil, name of the frst of the Ruling Stewards 
of Gondor, means 'devoted to the house' (i.e. of the Kings). 

barad 'tower' in Barad-dur, Barad Either Barad 
Nimras; the plural in Emyn Beraid. 

beleg 'mighty 1 in Beteg, Belegaer, Belegost, Laer Cu 
Beleg. 

brago 'sudden' in Dagor Bragollach. 
brethil probably means 'silver birch'; of. Nimbrethil the 
birchwoods in Arvernien, and Fimbrethil, one of the 
Entwives. 

brith 'gravel' in Brithiach, Brithombar, Brithon. 

(For many names beginning wth C see entries under 

K) 

calen (galen) the usual Sindarin word for 'green', in 
Ard-galen, To! Galen, Calenardhon; also in Parth Galen 
('Green Sward') beside Anduin and Pinnath Gelin ('Green 
Ridges') in Gondor. See kal- 

cam (from kamba) 'hand', but specifically of the hand 
held cupped in the attitude of receiving or holding, in 
Camlost, Erchamion. 

carak- This root is seen in Quenya carca 'fang', of 
which the Sindarin form carch occurs in Carcharoth, and 
also in Carchost ('Fang Fort', one of the Towers of the 
Teeth at the entrance to Mordor). Cf. Caragdur, Carach 
Angren ('Iron Jaws', the rampart and dike guarding the 
entrance to Udun in Mordor), and Helcaraxe. 

caran 'red', Quenya came, in Caranthir, Cam'll, 
Orocarni; also in Caradhras, from caran-rass, the 'Red- 
horn' in the Misty Mountains, and Camimirie 'red-jewelled', 
the rowan-tree in Treebeard's song. The translation of 
Carcharoth in the text as 'Red Maw' must depend on 
association with this word; see carak-. 

celeb 'silver' (Quenya telep, telpe, as in Telperion) in 
Celebom, Celebrant, Celebros. Celebrimbor means 
'silver-fist', from the adjective celebrin 'silver 1 (meaning not 
'made of silver' but 'like silver, in hue or worth') and paur 
(Quenya quare) 'fist' often used to mean 'hand'; the Quenya 
form of the name was Telperinquar. Celebrindal has 
celebrin and tal, dal 'foot'. 

coron 'mound' in Coroll aire (also called Coron 



Oiolaire, which latter word appears to mean 'Ever-summer', 
c f . Oiolosse); cf. Cerin Amroth, the great mound in 
Lothlorien. 

cu 'bow' in Cuthalion, Dor Cuarthol, Laer Cu Bel eg. 
cuivie 'awakening' in Cuivienen (Sindarin Nen Echui). 
Other derivatives of the same root are Dor Fim/JGuinar; 
coire, the first beginning of Spring, Sindarin echuir, The 
Lord of the Rings Appendix D; and coimas 'life-bread', 
Quenya name of lembas. 

cul- 'golden-red' in Culurien. 
curu 'skill' in Curuftn(we), Curunlr. 
dae 'shadow' in Dor Daedeloth, and perhaps in 
Daeron. 

dagor 'battle'; the root is ndak- cf. Haudh-en- 
Ndengin. Another derivative is Dagnir(Dagnir Glaurunga 
'Glaurung's Bane'). 

del 'horror* in Deldumth; deloth 'abhorrence' in Dor 
Daedeloth. 

din 'silent' in Dor Dlnen; cf. Rath Dlnen, the Silent 
Street in Minas Tirith, and Amon Din, one of the beacon- 
hills of Gondor. 

dol 'head' in Lorindol; often applied to hills and 
mountains, as in Dol Guldur, Dolmed, Mindolluin (also 
Nardol, one of the beacon-hills of Gondor, and Fanuidhol, 
one of the Mountains of Moria). 

dor 'land' (i.e. dry land as opposed to sea) was 
derived from ndor; it occurs in many Sindarin names, as 
Doriath, Dorthonion, Eriador, Gondor, Mordor, etc. In 
Quenya the stem was blended and confused with a quite 
distinct word nore meaning 'people'; in origin Valinore was 
strictly 'the people of the Valar', but Valandor 'the land of 
the Valar', and similarly Numen(n)ore 'people of the West', 
but Numendor 'land of the West'. Quenya Endor 'Middle- 
earth' was from ened 'middle' and ndor; this in Sindarin 
became Ennor (cf. ennorath 'middle lands' in the chant A 
Elbereth Gilthoniel). 

draug 'wolf in Draugluin. 

du 'night, dimness' in Deldumth, Ephel Duath. 
Derived from earlier dome, whence Quenya lome; thus 
Sindarin dulin 'nightingale' corresponds to lomelinde. 



duin '(long) river' in Anduin, Baranduin, Esgalduin, 
Malduin, Taur-im-Duinath. 

dur' dark' in Barad-dur, Caragdur, Dol Guldur; also in 
Durthang (a castle in Mordor). 

ear 'sea' (Quenya) in Earendil, Earrame, and many 
other names. The Sindarin word gaer (in Belegaer) is 
apparently derived from the same original stem. 

echor in Echoriath 'Encircling Mountains' and Orfalch 
Echor; cf. Rammas Echor '{he great wall of the outer circle' 
about the Pelennor Fields at Minas Tirith. 

edhel 'elf (Sindarin) in Adanedhel, Aredhel, 
Gloredhel, Ost-in-Edhil; also in Peredhil 'Half-elven'. 

eithel 'well' in Eithel Ivrin, Eithel Sirion, Barad Eithel; 
also in Mitheithel, the river Hoarwell in Eriador (named 
from its source). See kel-. 

el, elen 'star'. According to Elvish legend, e/e was a 
primitive exclamation 'behold!' made by the Elves when 
they first saw the stars. From this origin derived the ancient 
words el and elen, meaning 'star 1 , and the adjectives elda 
and elena, meaning 'of the stars'. These elements appear 
in a great many names. For the later use of the name Eldar 
see the Index. The Sindarin equivalent of Elda was Edhel 
(plural Edhil), q.v.; but the strictly corresponding form was 
Eledh, which occurs in Eledhwen. 

er' one, alone', \r\Amon Ereb (cf. Erebor, the Lonely 
Mountain), Erchamion, Eressea, Eru. 
ereg 'thorn, holly 1 in Eregion, Region, 
esgal 'screen, hiding' in Esgalduin. 
falas 'shore, line of surf (Quenya falasse) in Falas, 
Belfalas; also Anfalas in Gondor. Cf. Falathar, Falathrim. 
Another derivative from the root was Quenya falma 
'(crested) wave', whence Falmari, Mar-nu-Falmar. 

faroth is derived from a root meaning 'hunt, pursue'; in 
the Lay of Leithian the Taur-en-Faroth above Nargothrond 
are called 'the Hills of the Hunters'. 

faug- 'gape' in Anfauglir, Anfauglith, Dor-nu-Fauglith. 
fea 'spirit' in Feanor, Feanturi. 
fin- 'hair' in Finduilas, Fingon, Fin rod, Glorftndel. 
formen 'north' (Quenya) in Formenos; Sindarin forn 
(also for, forod) in Fomost. 



fuin 'gloom, darkness' (Quenya huine) in Fuinur, Taur- 
nu-Fuin. 

gaer 'sea' in Belegaer (and in Gaerys, Sindarin name 
of Osse). Said to derive from the stem gaya 'awe, dread', 
and to have been the name made for the vast and terrifying 
Great Sea when the Eldar first came to its shores. 

gaur 'werewolf (from a root ngrnw- 'howl') in Tol-in- 
Gaurhoth. 

gil 'star 1 in Dagor-nuin-Giliath, Osgiliath (giliath 'host 
of stars'); Gil-Estel, Gil-galad. 

girith 'shuddering' in Nen Girith; cf. also Girithron, 
name of the last month of the year in Sindarin ( The Lord of 
the Rings Appendix D). 

glin 'gleam' (particularly applied to the eyes) in 
Maeglin. 

golodh is the Sindarin form of Quenya Noldo; see gul. 
Plural Golodhrim, and Gelydh (in Annon-in-Gelydh). 

gond 'stone' in Gondolin, Gondor, Gonnhirhm, 
Argonath, seregon. The name of the hidden city of King 
Turgon was devised by him in Quenya as Ondolinde 
(Quenya ondo= Sindarin gond, and Unde 'singing, song'); 
but it was known always in legend in the Sindarin form 
Gondolin, which was probably interpreted as gond-dolen 
'Hidden Rock'. 

gor 'horror, dread' in Gorthaur, Gorthol; goroth of the 
same meaning, with reduplicated gor, in Gorgoroth, Ered 
Gorgoroth. 

groth (grod) 'delving, underground dwelling' in 
Menegroth, Nogrod (probably also in Nimrodel, 'lady of the 
white cave'). Nogrod was originally Novrod 'hollow delving' 
(hence the translation Hollov\hold), but was altered under 
the influence of naug 'dwarf. 

gul 'sorcery 1 in Dot Guldur, Minas Morgul. This word 
was derived from the same ancient stem ngol- that 
appears \r\Noldor; cf. Quenya note 'long study, lore, 
knowledge'. But the Sindarin word was darkened in sense 
by its frequent use in the compound morgul 'black arts'. 

gurth 'death' in Gurthang (see also Melkor in the 
Index). 

gmith 'people' in Gvaith-i-Mirdain; cf. Enedmith 



'Middle-folk', name of the land between the Greyflood and 
the Isen. 

gmlh, vBth 'shadow' in Deldumth, Ephel Duath; also 
in Gmthlo, the river Greyflood in Eriador. Related forms in 
Ered Wethrin, Thurlngviethil. (This Sindarin word referred 
to dim light, not to the shadows of objects cast by light: 
these were called morchaint' dark shapes'.) 

hadhod mHadhodrond (translation of Khazad-dum) 
was a rendering of Khazad into Sindarin sounds. 

haudh 'mound' in Haudh-en-Arwen, Haudh-en-Elleth, 
etc. 

heru 'lord' in Herumor, Herunumen; Sindarin hir in 
Gonnhirrim, Rohirrim, Barahir; hiril 'lady 1 in Hirilom. 
him 'cool' in Himlad (and Himring?). 
h?n 'children' in Eruhini 'Children of Eru'; Nam i Hin 
Hurin. 

hith 'mist' in Hithaeglir, Hithlum (also in Nen Hithoel, 
a lake in Anduin). Hithlum is Sindarin in form, adapted 
from the Quenya name Hisildme given by the Noldorin 
exiles (Quenya /7/s/e 'mist', cf. Hisime, the name of the 
eleventh month of the year. The Lord of the Rings 
Appendix D). 

hoth 'host, horde' (nearly always in a bad sense) in 
Tol-in-Gaurhoth; also in Loss(h)oth, the Snowmen of 
Forochel (The Lord of the Rings Appendix A [I, iii]) and 
Glamhoth 'din-horde', a name for Ores. 

hyarmen 'south' (Quenya) in Hyarmentir; Sindarin har- 
, ham, harad. 

ia 'void, abyss' in Mori a. 
iant 'bridge' in lantlaur. 
iath 'fence' in Doriath. 

iaur 'old' in Iant laur; cf. the Elvish name of Bombadil, 
lannain. 

ilm- This stem appears in Ilmen, II mare, and also in 
llmarin ('mansion of the high airs', the dwelling of Manwe 
and Varda upon Oiolosse). 

iluve 'the whole, the all' in lluvatar. 
kaT (gal-) This root, meaning 'shine', appears in 
Calacirya, Calaquendi, Tar-Calion; galvom, Gil-galad, 
Galadriel. The last two names have no connexion with 


Sindarin ga/ad/? tree', although in the case of Galadriel 
such a connexion was often made, and the name altered to 
Galadhriel. In the High-elven speech her name was 
Al(a)tariel, derived from alata 'radiance' (Sindarin galad) 
and riel 'garlanded maiden' (from a root rig- 'twine, 
wreathe'): the whole meaning 'maiden crowned with a 
radiant garland', referring to her hair, calen (galen) 'green' 
is etymologically 'bright', and derives from this root; see 
also aglar. 

kano 'commander': this Quenya word is the origin of 
the second element in Fingon and Turgon. 

kel- 'go away 1 , of water 'flow away, flow down', in 
Celon;Uomet-kele 'issue of water, spring' was derived, 
with transposition of the consonants, Quenya ehtele, 
Sindarin eithel. 

kemen 'earth' in Kementari; a Quenya word referring 
to the earth as a flat floor beneath menel, the heavens. 

kheliek- 'ice' in Helcar, Helcaraxe (Quenya helka 'icy, 
ice-cold'). But in Helevom the first element is Sindarin 
heledh 'glass', taken from Khuzdul kheled (cf. Kheled- 
zaram 'Mirrormere'); Helevom means 'black glass' (cf. 
galvom). 

khil- 'follow' in Hildor, Hildorien, Eluchll. 

kir- 'cut, cleave' in Calacirya, Cirth, Angerthas, Cirith 
(Ninniach, Thoronath). From the sense 'pass swiftly 
through' was derived Quenya clrya 'sharp-prowed ship' (cf. 
English cutter), and this meaning appears also in Clrdan, 
Tar-Ciryatan, and no doubt in the name of Isildur's son 
Clryon. 

lad 'plain, valley 1 in Dagorlad, Himlad; imlad a narrow 
valley with steep sides, in Imladris (cf. also Imlad Morgul in 
the Ephel Duath). 

laure 'gold' (but of light and colour, not of the metal) in 
Laurelin; the Sindarin forms in Gloredhel, Glorfindel, Loeg 
Ningloron, Lorindol, Rathloriel. 

Ihach 'leaping flame' in Dagor Bragollach, and 
probably \nAnglachel (the sword made by Eol of meteoric 
iron). 

lin (1) 'pool, mere' in Linaevien (which contains aew 
[Quenya a/Vte] 'small bird'), Teiglin; cf. aelin. 



tin- (2) This root, meaning 'sing, make a musical 
sound', occurs mAinul indale, Laurel in, Lindar, Lindon, 
Ered Lindon, lomelindi. 

lith 'ash' in Anfauglith, Dor-nu-Fauglith; also in Ered 
Lithui, the Ashen Mountains, forming the northern border of 
Mordor, and Lithlad 'Plain of Ashes' at the feet of Ered 
Lithui. 

lok- 'bend, loop' in Uruloki (Quenya [h]loke 'snake, 
serpent', Sindarin Ihug). 

lom 'echo' in Dor-lomin, Ered Lomin; related are 
Lam moth, Lanthir Lamath. 

lome 'dusk' in Lorn ion, lomelindi; see du. 
londe 'land-locked haven' in Alqualonde; the Sindarin 
form lond ( lonn ) in Mithlond. 

los 'snow' in Oiolosse (Quenya oio 'ever 1 and losse 
'snow, snow-white'); Sindarin loss in Amon Uilos and 
Aeglos. 

loth 'flower' in Lothlorien, Nimloth; Quenya lote in 
Ninquelote, Vingilote. 

luin 'blue' in Ered Luin, Helluin, Luinil, Mindolluin. 
maeg 'sharp, piercing' (Quenya maika) in Maeglin. 
mal- 'gold' in Malduin, Malinalda; also in mallom, and 
in the Field of Cormallen, which means 'golden circle' and 
was named from the culumalda trees that grew there (see 
cul-). 

man- 'good, blessed, unmarred' in Aman, Manv\e; 
derivatives of Aman in Amandil, Araman, Umanyar. 

met- 'love' in Melian (from Melyanna 'dear gift'); this 
stem is seen also in the Sindarin word mellon 'friend' in the 
inscription on the West-gate of Moria. 

men 'way' in Numen, Hyarmen, Romen, Formen. 
menel 'the heavens' in Meneldil, Menelmacar, 
Meneltarma. 

mereth 'feast' in Mereth Aderthad; also in Merethrond, 
the Hall of Feasts in Minas Tirith. 

minas 'tower' in Annuminas, Minas Anor, Minas 
Tirith, etc. The same stem, occurs in other words referring 
to isolated, prominent, things, e.g. Mindolluin, Mindon; 
probably related is Quenya minya 'first' (cf. Tar-Minyatur, 
the name of Elros as first King of Numenor). 



mir 'jewel' (Quenya mire) in Elemmire, Gmith-i- 
Mirdain, Miriel, Nauglamir, Tar-Atanamir. 

mith 'grey 1 in Mithlond, Mithrandir, Mithrim; also hi 
Mitheithel, the river Hoarwell in Eriador. 

mor 'dark' in Mordor, Morgoth, Moria, Moriquendi, 
Mormegil, Momen, etc. 

moth 'dusk' in Nan Elmoth. 

nan(d) 'valley 1 in Nan Dungortheb, Nan Elmoth, Nan 
Tathren. 

nar 'fire' in Narsil, Narya; present also in the original 
forms of Aegnor (Aikanaro 'Sharp Flame' or 'Fell Fire') and 
Feanor (Feanaro 'Spirit of Fire'). The Sindarin form was 
naur, as in Sammath Naur, the Chambers of Fire in 
Orodruin. Derived from the same ancient root (a)nar was 
the name of the Sun, Quenya Anar (also i nAnarion), 
Sindarin/4nor(cf. Minas Anor, Anorien ). 

naug 'dwarf in Naugrim; see also Nogrod in entry 
groth. Related is another Sindarin word for 'dwarf, nogoth, 
plural noegyth (Noegyth Nibin 'Petty-dwarves') and 
nogothrim. 

-(n)dil is a very frequent ending of personal names, 
Amandil, Earendil (shortened Eamil), Elendil, Mardil, etc.; 
it implies 'devotion', 'disinterested love' (see Mardil in entry 
bar). 

~{n)dur \ n names such as Earendur (shortened Eamur) 
is similar in meaning to -(n)dil. 

neldor 'beech' in Neldoreth; but it seems that this was 
properly the name of Hirilorn, the great beech-tree with 
three trunks ( nelde 'three' and om). 

nen 'water', used of lakes, pools, and lesser rivers, in 
Nen Girith, Nenning, Nenuial, Nenya; Cuivienen, Uinen; 
also in many names in The Lord of the Rings, as Nen 
Hithoel, Bruinen, EmynAmen, Numen. N?n 'wet' in Loeg 
Ningloron; also in Nindalf. 

nim 'white' (from earlier nimf, nimp) in Nimbrethil, 
Nimloth, Nimphelos, niphredil ( niphred 'pallor'), Barad 
Nimras, Ered Nimrais. The Quenya form was ninque; thus 
Ninquel6te=Nimloth. Cf. also Taniquetil. 

om 'tree' in Celebom, Hirilorn; cf. Fangom 
'Treebeard' and mallom, plural mellym, the trees of 



Lothlorien. 

orod 'mountain' in Orodruin, Thangorodrim; Orocami, 
Oromet. Plural ered in Ered Eng rin, Ered Li ndon, etc. 

os(t) 'fortress' in Angrenost, Belegost, Forme nos, 
Fomost, Mandos, Nargothrond (from Narog-ost-rond), 
Os(t)giliaih, Ost-in-Edhil. 

palan (Quenya) 'far and wide' in Palantiri, Tar- 
Palantir. 

pel- 'go round, encircle' in Pelargir, Peldri, and in the 
Pelennor, the 'fenced land' of Minas Tirith; also in Ephel 
Brandir, Ephel Duath (ephel from et-pel 'outer fence'). 

quen- (quet-) 'say, speak' in Quendi (Calaquendi, 
Laiquendi, Moriquendi), Quenya, Valaquenta, Quenta 
Silmarillion. The Sindarin forms havep (or b) for qu; e.g. 
pedo 'speak' in the inscription on the West-gate of Moria, 
corresponding to the Quenya stem quet; and Gandalfs 
words before the gate, lasto beth lammen 'listen to the 
words of my tongue', where beth 'word' corresponds to 
Quenya quetta. 

ram 'wall' (Quenya ramba) in Andram, Ramdal; also 
i n Rammas Echor, the wall about the Pelennor Fields at 
Minas Tirith. 

ran- 'wander, stray 1 in Rana, the Moon, and in 
Mithrandir, Aerandir; also in the river Gilraen in Gondor. 

rant 'course' in the river-names Adurant (withadi/ 
'double') and Celebrant ('Silverlode'). 

ras 'horn' in Barad Nimras, also in Caradhras 
('Redhorn') and Methedras ('Last Peak') in the Misty 
Mountains; plural rais in Ered Nimrais. 

rauko 'demon' in Valaraukar; Sindarin raug, rog in 
Balrog. 

ril 'brilliance' in Idril, Silmaril; also mAnduril (the 
sword of Aragorn) and in mithril (Moria-silver). Idril's name 
in Quenya form was Itarille (or Itarilde), from a stem ita- 
'sparkle'. 

rim 'great number, host' (Quenya hmbn) was 
commonly used to form collective plurals, as Golodhrim, 
Mithrim (see the Index), Naugrim, Thangorodrim, etc. 

ring 'cold, chill' in Ringil, Ringwl, Himring; also in the 
river Ringlo in Gondor, and in Ringare, Quenya name of 



the last month of the year ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix 

D). 

ris 'cleave' appears to have blended with the stem kris- 
of similar meaning (a derivative of the root kir- 'cleave, cut', 
q.v.); hence Angrist (also Orcrist 'Orc-cleaver', the sword of 
Thorin Oakenshield), Crissaeghm, Imladris. 

roch 'horse' (Quenya rokko) in Rochallor, Rohan (from 
Rochand 'land of horses'), Rohirrim; also in Roheryn 
'horse of the lady 1 (cf. heru), Aragorn's horse, which was so 
called because given to him by Arwen ( The Return of the 
King V 2). 

rom- A stem used of the sound of trumpets and horns 
which appears in Orome and Valaroma; cf. Bema, the 
name of this Vala in the language of Rohan as translated 
into Anglo-Saxon in The Lord of the Rings Appendix A (II): 
Anglo-Saxon beme 'trumpet'. 

romen 'uprising, sunrise, east' (Quenya) in Romenna. 
The Sindarin words for 'east', rhun (in Talath Rhunen) and 
amrun, were of the same origin. 

rond meant a vaulted or arched roof, or a large hall or 
chamber so roofed; so Nargothrond (see ost), 
Hadhodrond, Aglarond. It could be applied to the heavens, 
hence the name Elrond 'star-dome'. 

ros 'foam, spindrift, spray 1 in Celebros, Elros, Rauros; 
also in Cair Andros, an island in the river Anduin. 
ruin 'red flame' (Quenya runya) in Orodruin. 
ruth 'anger' \nAranruth. 

sam '(small) stone' in Sam Athrad ( Sam Ford on the 
Brandywine is a half-translation of this); also in Sam Gebir 
('stone-spikes': ceber, plural cebir ’stakes'), rapids in the 
river Anduin. A derivative is Semi, a river in Gondor. 
sereg 'blood' (Quenya serke) in seregon. 
sil- (and variant thil-) 'shine (with white or silver light)' in 
Belthil, Galathilion, Silpion, and in Quenya /s/7, Sindarin 
Ithil, the Moon (whence isiidur, Narsil; Minas Ithil, Ithilien). 
The Quenya word Silmarilli is said to derive from the name 
silima that Feanor gave to the substance from which they 
were made. 

s?r 'river', from root sir- 'flow', in Ossiriand (the first 
element is from the stem of the numeral 'seven', Quenya 



otso, Sindarin odo), Sirion; also in Sirannon (the 'Gate- 
stream' of Moria) and Si nth ('a flowing', as tirith 'watching' 
from tit), a river in Gondor. With change ofs to h in the 
middle of words it is present in Minhiriath 'between the 
rivers', the region between the Brandywine and the 
Greyflood; in Nanduhirion 'vale of dim streams', the Dimrill 
Dale (see nan[d\ and du), and in EthirAnduin, the outflow 
or delta of Anduin (from et-sir). 

sul 'wind' in Amon Sul, Sulimo; cf .sulime, Quenya 
name of the third month of the year (The Lord of the Rings 
Appendix D). 

tal (dal) 'foot' in Celebrindal, and with the meaning 
'end' in Ramdal. 

talath 'flat lands, plain' in Talath Dimen, Talath 
Rhunen. 

tar- 'high' (Quenya tara ’lofty 1 ), prefix of the Quenya 
names of the Numenorean Kings; also in Annatar. 
Feminine tari 'she that is high, Queen' mElentari, 
Kementari. Cf. tarma 'pillar' in Meneltarma. 

tathar 'willow'; adjective tathren in Nan-tathren; 
Quenya tasare in Tasarinan, Nan-tasarion ( see Nan- 
tathren in the Index). 

taur 'wood, forest' (Quenya taure) in Tauron, Taur-im- 
Duinath, Taur-nu-Fuin. 

tel- 'finish, end, be last' in Teleri. 
thalion 'strong, dauntless' in Cuthalion, Thai ion. 
thong 'oppression' in Thangorodrim, also in Durthang 
(a castle in Mordor). Quenya sanga meant 'press, throng', 
whence Sangahyando 'Throng-cleaver', name of a man in 
Gondor ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix A [I, iv]). 

thar- 'athwart, across' in SamAthrad, Thargelion; also 
in Tharbad (from thara-pata 'crossway*) where the ancient 
road from Amor and Gondor crossed the Grey-flood. 

thaur 'abominable, abhorrent' in Sau ron (from 
Thauron), Gorthaur. 

thin(d) 'grey 1 in Thingol; Quenya sinda in Sindar, 
Singollo ( Sindacollo : collo 'cloak'). 
thol 'helm' in DorCuarthol, Gorthol. 
thon 'pine-tree' in Dorthonion. 
thoron 'eagle' in Thorondor (Quenya Sorontar), Cirith 



Thoronath. The Quenya form is perhaps present in the 
constellation-name Soronume. 

til 'point, horn' in Taniquetil, Tilion ('the Horned'); also 
in Celebdil' Silverti ne', one of the Mountains of Moria. 

tin- 'sparkle' (Quenya tinta 'cause to sparkle', tinwe 
'spark') in Tintalle; also in tindome 'starry twilight' (The 
Lord of the Rings Appendix D), whence tindomerel 
'daughter of the twilight', a poetic name for the nightingale 
(Sindarin Tinuviel). It appears also in Sindarin ithildin 
'starmoon', the substance of which the devices on the 
West-gate of Moria were made. 

tir 'watch, watch over 1 in Minas Tirith, palantiri, Tar- 
Palantir, Tirion. 

to! 'isle' (rising with sheer sides from the sea or from a 
river) in Tol Eressea, Tol Galen, etc. 

turn 'valley 1 in Tumhalad, Tumladen; Quenya tumbo 
(cf. Treebeard's tumbalemoma 'lack deep valley 1 . The 7Vio 
Toners III 4). Cf. Utumno, Sindarin Udun (Gandalf in 
Mordor named the Balrog 'Flame of Udun'), a name 
afterwards used of the deep dale in Moria between the 
Morannon and the Isenmouths. 

tur 'power, mastery 1 in Turambar, Turgon, Turin, 
Feanturi, Tar-'Minyatur. 

uial 'twilight' \r\Aelin-uial, Nenuial. 
ur- 'heat, be hot' in Uruloki; cf. Urime and Urui, 
Quenya and Sindarin names of the eighth month of the year 
(The Lord of the Rings Appendix D). Related is the 
Quenya word aure 'sunlight, day' (cf. Fingon's cry 'before 
the Nirnaeth Arnoediad), Sindarin aur, which in the form Or- 
is prefixed to the names of the days of the week. 

val- 'power' in Valar, Valacirca, Valaquenta, 
Vaiaraukar, Val(i)mar, Valinor. The original stem was bal-, 
preserved in Sindarin Balan, plural Belain, the Valar, and 
in Balrog. 

v\en 'maiden' is a frequent ending, as in Eamen, 
MonAen. 

wng 'foam, spray 1 in Elwng, Vingilot (and only in these 
two names). 

yave 'fruit' (Quenya) in Yavanna; cf. Yavannie, 
Quenya name of the ninth month of the year, and yavie 



'autumn' ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D). 